secret-key_cryptography/xchacha20-poly1305_construction.md, before:

# The XChaCha20-Poly1305 construction

The XChaCha20-Poly1305 construction can safely encrypt up to 2^80 messages with the same key, without any practical limit to the size of a message (up to 2^70 bytes).

As an alternative to counters, its large nonce size (192-bit) allows random nonces to be safely used.

## Example (combined mode)

```c
#define MESSAGE (const unsigned char *) "test"
#define MESSAGE_LEN 4
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA (const unsigned char *) "123456"
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN 6

unsigned char nonce[crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_NPUBBYTES];
unsigned char key[crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char ciphertext[MESSAGE_LEN + crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES];
unsigned long long ciphertext_len;

randombytes_buf(key, sizeof key);
randombytes_buf(nonce, sizeof nonce);

crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt(ciphertext, &ciphertext_len,
                                      MESSAGE, MESSAGE_LEN,
                                      ADDITIONAL_DATA, ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                                      NULL, nonce, key);

unsigned char decrypted[MESSAGE_LEN];
unsigned long long decrypted_len;
if (crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt(decrypted, &decrypted_len,
                                          NULL,
                                          ciphertext, ciphertext_len,
                                          ADDITIONAL_DATA,
                                          ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                                          nonce, key) != 0) {
    /* message forged! */
}
```

## Combined mode

In combined mode, the authentication tag and the encrypted message are stored together. This is usually what you want.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt(unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long *clen,
                                          const unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long mlen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt()` function encrypts a message `m` whose length is `mlen` bytes using a secret key `k` (`crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_KEYBYTES` bytes) and public nonce `npub` (`crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_NPUBBYTES` bytes).

The encrypted message, as well as a tag authenticating both the confidential message `m` and `adlen` bytes of non-confidential data `ad`, are put into `c`.

`ad` can be a `NULL` pointer with `adlen` equal to `0` if no additional data are required.

At most `mlen + crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES` bytes are put into `c`, and the actual number of bytes is stored into `clen` unless `clen` is a `NULL` pointer.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The public nonce `npub` should never ever be reused with the same key. Nonces can be generated using `randombytes_buf()` for every message. XChaCha20 uses 192-bit nonces, so the probability of a collision is negligible. Using a counter is also perfectly fine: nonces have to be unique for a given key, but they don't have to be unpredicable.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt(unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long *mlen,
                                          unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long clen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt()` function verifies that the ciphertext `c` (as produced by `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt()`) includes a valid tag using a secret key `k`, a public nonce `npub`, and additional data `ad` (`adlen` bytes).

`ad` can be a `NULL` pointer with `adlen` equal to `0` if no additional data are required.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The function returns `-1` is the verification fails.

If the verification succeeds, the function returns `0`, puts the decrypted message into `m` and stores its actual number of bytes into `mlen` if `mlen` is not a `NULL` pointer.

At most `clen - crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES` bytes will be put into `m`.

## Detached mode

Some applications may need to store the authentication tag and the encrypted message at different locations.

For this specific use case, "detached" variants of the functions above are available.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt_detached(unsigned char *c,
                                                   unsigned char *mac,
                                                   unsigned long long *maclen_p,
                                                   const unsigned char *m,
                                                   unsigned long long mlen,
                                                   const unsigned char *ad,
                                                   unsigned long long adlen,
                                                   const unsigned char *nsec,
                                                   const unsigned char *npub,
                                                   const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt_detached()` function encrypts a message `m` with a key `k` and a nonce `npub`. It puts the resulting ciphertext, whose length is equal to the message, into `c`.

It also computes a tag that authenticates the ciphertext as well as optional, additional data `ad` of length `adlen`. This tag is put into `mac`, and its length is `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES` bytes.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt_detached(unsigned char *m,
                                                   unsigned char *nsec,
                                                   const unsigned char *c,
                                                   unsigned long long clen,
                                                   const unsigned char *mac,
                                                   const unsigned char *ad,
                                                   unsigned long long adlen,
                                                   const unsigned char *npub,
                                                   const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt_detached()` function verifies that the authentication tag `mac` is valid for the ciphertext `c` of length `clen` bytes, the key `k` , the nonce `npub` and optional, additional data `ad` of length `adlen` bytes.

If the tag is not valid, the function returns `-1` and doesn't do any further processing.

If the tag is valid, the ciphertext is decrypted and the plaintext is put into `m`. The length is equal to the length of the ciphertext.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

## Constants

- `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_KEYBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_NPUBBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES`

## Algorithm details

- Encryption: XChaCha20 stream cipher
- Authentication: Poly1305 MAC

## Notes

XChaCha20-Poly1305 was introduced in Libsodium 1.0.12.

Unlike other variants directly using the ChaCha20 cipher, generating a random nonce for each message is acceptable with this XChaCha20-based construction.

The API conforms to the proposed API for the CAESAR competition.

A high-level `crypto_aead_*()` API is intentionally not defined until the [CAESAR](http://competitions.cr.yp.to/caesar.html) competition is over.

Commit message:

Recommended XChaCha20 over ChaCha20 if interoperability is not a concern

secret-key_cryptography/xchacha20-poly1305_construction.md, after:

# The XChaCha20-Poly1305 construction

The XChaCha20-Poly1305 construction can safely encrypt up to 2^80 messages with the same key, without any practical limit to the size of a message (up to 2^70 bytes).

As an alternative to counters, its large nonce size (192-bit) allows random nonces to be safely used.

For this reason, and if interoperability with other libraries is not a concern, this is the recommended AEAD construction.

## Example (combined mode)

```c
#define MESSAGE (const unsigned char *) "test"
#define MESSAGE_LEN 4
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA (const unsigned char *) "123456"
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN 6

unsigned char nonce[crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_NPUBBYTES];
unsigned char key[crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char ciphertext[MESSAGE_LEN + crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES];
unsigned long long ciphertext_len;

randombytes_buf(key, sizeof key);
randombytes_buf(nonce, sizeof nonce);

crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt(ciphertext, &ciphertext_len,
                                      MESSAGE, MESSAGE_LEN,
                                      ADDITIONAL_DATA, ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                                      NULL, nonce, key);

unsigned char decrypted[MESSAGE_LEN];
unsigned long long decrypted_len;
if (crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt(decrypted, &decrypted_len,
                                          NULL,
                                          ciphertext, ciphertext_len,
                                          ADDITIONAL_DATA,
                                          ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                                          nonce, key) != 0) {
    /* message forged! */
}
```

## Combined mode

In combined mode, the authentication tag and the encrypted message are stored together. This is usually what you want.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt(unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long *clen,
                                          const unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long mlen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt()` function encrypts a message `m` whose length is `mlen` bytes using a secret key `k` (`crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_KEYBYTES` bytes) and public nonce `npub` (`crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_NPUBBYTES` bytes).

The encrypted message, as well as a tag authenticating both the confidential message `m` and `adlen` bytes of non-confidential data `ad`, are put into `c`.

`ad` can be a `NULL` pointer with `adlen` equal to `0` if no additional data are required.

At most `mlen + crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES` bytes are put into `c`, and the actual number of bytes is stored into `clen` unless `clen` is a `NULL` pointer.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The public nonce `npub` should never ever be reused with the same key. Nonces can be generated using `randombytes_buf()` for every message. XChaCha20 uses 192-bit nonces, so the probability of a collision is negligible. Using a counter is also perfectly fine: nonces have to be unique for a given key, but they don't have to be unpredicable.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt(unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long *mlen,
                                          unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long clen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt()` function verifies that the ciphertext `c` (as produced by `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt()`) includes a valid tag using a secret key `k`, a public nonce `npub`, and additional data `ad` (`adlen` bytes).

`ad` can be a `NULL` pointer with `adlen` equal to `0` if no additional data are required.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The function returns `-1` is the verification fails.

If the verification succeeds, the function returns `0`, puts the decrypted message into `m` and stores its actual number of bytes into `mlen` if `mlen` is not a `NULL` pointer.

At most `clen - crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES` bytes will be put into `m`.

## Detached mode

Some applications may need to store the authentication tag and the encrypted message at different locations.

For this specific use case, "detached" variants of the functions above are available.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt_detached(unsigned char *c,
                                                   unsigned char *mac,
                                                   unsigned long long *maclen_p,
                                                   const unsigned char *m,
                                                   unsigned long long mlen,
                                                   const unsigned char *ad,
                                                   unsigned long long adlen,
                                                   const unsigned char *nsec,
                                                   const unsigned char *npub,
                                                   const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_encrypt_detached()` function encrypts a message `m` with a key `k` and a nonce `npub`. It puts the resulting ciphertext, whose length is equal to the message, into `c`.

It also computes a tag that authenticates the ciphertext as well as optional, additional data `ad` of length `adlen`. This tag is put into `mac`, and its length is `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES` bytes.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

```c
int crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt_detached(unsigned char *m,
                                                   unsigned char *nsec,
                                                   const unsigned char *c,
                                                   unsigned long long clen,
                                                   const unsigned char *mac,
                                                   const unsigned char *ad,
                                                   unsigned long long adlen,
                                                   const unsigned char *npub,
                                                   const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_decrypt_detached()` function verifies that the authentication tag `mac` is valid for the ciphertext `c` of length `clen` bytes, the key `k` , the nonce `npub` and optional, additional data `ad` of length `adlen` bytes.

If the tag is not valid, the function returns `-1` and doesn't do any further processing.

If the tag is valid, the ciphertext is decrypted and the plaintext is put into `m`. The length is equal to the length of the ciphertext.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

## Constants

- `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_KEYBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_NPUBBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_xchacha20poly1305_ABYTES`

## Algorithm details

- Encryption: XChaCha20 stream cipher
- Authentication: Poly1305 MAC

## Notes

XChaCha20-Poly1305 was introduced in Libsodium 1.0.12.

Unlike other variants directly using the ChaCha20 cipher, generating a random nonce for each message is acceptable with this XChaCha20-based construction, provided that the output of the PRNG is indistinguishable from random data.

The API conforms to the proposed API for the CAESAR competition.

A high-level `crypto_aead_*()` API is intentionally not defined until the [CAESAR](http://competitions.cr.yp.to/caesar.html) competition is over.
