README.md, before:

# The Sodium crypto library \(libsodium\)

Sodium is a modern, easy-to-use software library for encryption, decryption, signatures, password hashing and more.

It is a portable, cross-compilable, installable, packageable fork of [NaCl](http://nacl.cr.yp.to/), with a compatible API, and an extended API to improve usability even further.

Its goal is to provide all of the core operations needed to build higher-level cryptographic tools.

Sodium is cross-platforms and cross-languages. It runs on a variety of compilers and operating systems, including Windows \(with MinGW or Visual Studio, x86 and x86\_64\), iOS and Android. Javascript and WebAssembly versions are also available and are fully supported. Bindings for all common programming languages are available and well-supported.

The design choices emphasize security and ease of use. But despite the emphasis on high security, primitives are faster across-the-board than most implementations of the NIST standards.

[Version 1.0.13](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/releases) was released on Jul 14, 2017.

## Downloading libsodium

- [Github repository](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium)
- [Tarballs and pre-compiled binaries](https://download.libsodium.org/libsodium/releases/)
- [Documentation](https://doc.libsodium.org)

## Mailing list

A mailing-list is available to discuss libsodium.

In order to join, just send a random mail to `sodium-subscribe` {at} `pureftpd`{dot}`org`.

## Offline documentation

This documentation can be downloaded as ePUB \(for iPad, iPhone, Mac\), MOBI \(for Kindle\) and PDF here: [https://www.gitbook.com/book/jedisct1/libsodium/details](https://www.gitbook.com/book/jedisct1/libsodium/details)

## License

[ISC license](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISC_license).

See the `LICENSE` file for details.

## Thanks!

The developement of libsodium is entirely made by volunteers. We would like to specially thank the following companies and organizations for their contribution:

- [Paragonie Initiative Enterprise](https://paragonie.com/), who donated a Raspberry Pi to ensure that the library works perfectly on this hardware. Thanks!
- [Private Internet Access](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com), who sponsored a [complete security audit](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/blog/2017/08/libsodium-audit-results). This is amazing, thanks!
- [Maximilian Blochberger](https://github.com/blochberger), who generously donated $100. This will help a lot to cover the infrastructure costs. Thanks again, Max!

People who designed the primitives and wrote implementations the library is based on can be found in the [AUTHORS](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jedisct1/libsodium/master/AUTHORS) file. This project wouldn't exist without them.

Also a huge "thank you" to people and companies who contributed bindings for their favorite programming languages. A list can be found in the [THANKS](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jedisct1/libsodium/master/THANKS) file.

Another huge "thank you" to package maintainers who have been doing an amazing job at building packages for many distributions and operating systems.

Finally, thanks to **you** for reading this documentation and for the awesome projects you are going to build with this library!

Commit message:

Thanks a lot to Joshua Small!

README.md, after:

# The Sodium crypto library \(libsodium\)

Sodium is a modern, easy-to-use software library for encryption, decryption, signatures, password hashing and more.

It is a portable, cross-compilable, installable, packageable fork of [NaCl](http://nacl.cr.yp.to/), with a compatible API, and an extended API to improve usability even further.

Its goal is to provide all of the core operations needed to build higher-level cryptographic tools.

Sodium is cross-platforms and cross-languages. It runs on a variety of compilers and operating systems, including Windows \(with MinGW or Visual Studio, x86 and x86\_64\), iOS and Android. Javascript and WebAssembly versions are also available and are fully supported. Bindings for all common programming languages are available and well-supported.

The design choices emphasize security and ease of use. But despite the emphasis on high security, primitives are faster across-the-board than most implementations of the NIST standards.

[Version 1.0.13](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/releases) was released on Jul 14, 2017.

## Downloading libsodium

- [Github repository](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium)
- [Tarballs and pre-compiled binaries](https://download.libsodium.org/libsodium/releases/)
- [Documentation](https://doc.libsodium.org)

## Mailing list

A mailing-list is available to discuss libsodium.

In order to join, just send a random mail to `sodium-subscribe` {at} `pureftpd`{dot}`org`.

## Offline documentation

This documentation can be downloaded as ePUB \(for iPad, iPhone, Mac\), MOBI \(for Kindle\) and PDF here: [https://www.gitbook.com/book/jedisct1/libsodium/details](https://www.gitbook.com/book/jedisct1/libsodium/details)

## License

[ISC license](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISC_license).

See the `LICENSE` file for details.

## Thanks!

The developement of libsodium is entirely made by volunteers. We would like to specially thank the following companies and organizations for their contribution:

- [Paragonie Initiative Enterprise](https://paragonie.com/), who donated a Raspberry Pi to ensure that the library works perfectly on this hardware. Thanks!
- [Private Internet Access](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com), who sponsored a [complete security audit](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/blog/2017/08/libsodium-audit-results). This is amazing, thanks!
- [Maximilian Blochberger](https://github.com/blochberger) and Joshua Small, who both generously donated $100. This will help a lot to cover the infrastructure costs. Thanks again, Max and Joshua!

People who designed the primitives and wrote implementations the library is based on can be found in the [AUTHORS](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jedisct1/libsodium/master/AUTHORS) file. This project wouldn't exist without them.

Also a huge "thank you" to people and companies who contributed bindings for their favorite programming languages. A list can be found in the [THANKS](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jedisct1/libsodium/master/THANKS) file.

Another huge "thank you" to package maintainers who have been doing an amazing job at building packages for many distributions and operating systems.

Finally, thanks to **you** for reading this documentation and for the awesome projects you are going to build with this library!
