SUMMARY.md, before:

# Summary

- [Introduction](README.md)
- [Installation](installation/README.md)
- [Projects using libsodium](libsodium_users/README.md)
- [Commercial support](commercial_support/README.md)
- [Bindings for other languages](bindings_for_other_languages/README.md)
- [Usage](usage/README.md)
- [Helpers](helpers/README.md)
- [Secure memory](helpers/memory_management.md)
- [Generating random data](generating_random_data/README.md)
- [Secret-key cryptography](secret-key_cryptography/README.md)
  - [Authenticated encryption](secret-key_cryptography/authenticated_encryption.md)
  - [Encrypted stream/file encryption](secret-key_cryptography/secretstream.md)
  - [Authentication](secret-key_cryptography/secret-key_authentication.md)
  - [AEAD constructions](secret-key_cryptography/aead.md)
    - [ChaCha20-Poly1305](secret-key_cryptography/chacha20-poly1305.md)
      - [Original ChaCha20-Poly1305 construction](secret-key_cryptography/original_chacha20-poly1305_construction.md)
      - [IETF ChaCha20-Poly1305 construction](secret-key_cryptography/ietf_chacha20-poly1305_construction.md)
      - [XChaCha20-Poly1305 construction](secret-key_cryptography/xchacha20-poly1305_construction.md)
    - [AES256-GCM](secret-key_cryptography/aes-256-gcm.md)
      - [AES256-GCM with precomputation](secret-key_cryptography/aes-gcm_with_precomputation.md)
- [Public-key cryptography](public-key_cryptography/README.md)
  - [Authenticated encryption](public-key_cryptography/authenticated_encryption.md)
  - [Public-key signatures](public-key_cryptography/public-key_signatures.md)
  - [Sealed boxes](public-key_cryptography/sealed_boxes.md)
- [Hashing](hashing/README.md)
  - [Generic hashing](hashing/generic_hashing.md)
  - [Short-input hashing](hashing/short-input_hashing.md)
- [Password hashing](password_hashing/README.md)
  - [The Argon2 function](password_hashing/the_argon2i_function.md)
- [Key derivation](key_derivation/README.md)
- [Key exchange](key_exchange/README.md)
- [Advanced](advanced/README.md)
  - [SHA-2](advanced/sha-2_hash_function.md)
  - [HMAC-SHA-2](advanced/hmac-sha2.md)
  - [The Scrypt function](password_hashing/scrypt.md)
  - [Diffie-Hellman](advanced/scalar_multiplication.md)
  - [One-time authentication](advanced/poly1305.md)
  - [Stream ciphers](advanced/stream_ciphers.md)
    - [ChaCha20](advanced/chacha20.md)
    - [XChaCha20](advanced/xchacha20.md)
    - [Salsa20](advanced/salsa20.md)
    - [XSalsa20](advanced/xsalsa20.md)
  - [Ed25519 to Curve25519](advanced/ed25519-curve25519.md)
  - [Custom RNG](advanced/custom_rng.md)
- [Internals](internals/README.md)
- [Roadmap](internals/roadmap.md)

Commit message:

Encrypting a set of messages, the definitive guide

SUMMARY.md, after:

# Summary

- [Introduction](README.md)
- [Installation](installation/README.md)
- [Projects using libsodium](libsodium_users/README.md)
- [Commercial support](commercial_support/README.md)
- [Bindings for other languages](bindings_for_other_languages/README.md)
- [Usage](usage/README.md)
- [Helpers](helpers/README.md)
- [Secure memory](helpers/memory_management.md)
- [Generating random data](generating_random_data/README.md)
- [Secret-key cryptography](secret-key_cryptography/README.md)
  - [Authenticated encryption](secret-key_cryptography/authenticated_encryption.md)
  - [Encrypted streams and file encryption](secret-key_cryptography/secretstream.md)
  - [Encrypting a set of related messages](secret-key_cryptography/encrypted-messages.md)
  - [Authentication](secret-key_cryptography/secret-key_authentication.md)
  - [AEAD constructions](secret-key_cryptography/aead.md)
    - [ChaCha20-Poly1305](secret-key_cryptography/chacha20-poly1305.md)
      - [Original ChaCha20-Poly1305 construction](secret-key_cryptography/original_chacha20-poly1305_construction.md)
      - [IETF ChaCha20-Poly1305 construction](secret-key_cryptography/ietf_chacha20-poly1305_construction.md)
      - [XChaCha20-Poly1305 construction](secret-key_cryptography/xchacha20-poly1305_construction.md)
    - [AES256-GCM](secret-key_cryptography/aes-256-gcm.md)
      - [AES256-GCM with precomputation](secret-key_cryptography/aes-gcm_with_precomputation.md)
- [Public-key cryptography](public-key_cryptography/README.md)
  - [Authenticated encryption](public-key_cryptography/authenticated_encryption.md)
  - [Public-key signatures](public-key_cryptography/public-key_signatures.md)
  - [Sealed boxes](public-key_cryptography/sealed_boxes.md)
- [Hashing](hashing/README.md)
  - [Generic hashing](hashing/generic_hashing.md)
  - [Short-input hashing](hashing/short-input_hashing.md)
- [Password hashing](password_hashing/README.md)
  - [The Argon2 function](password_hashing/the_argon2i_function.md)
- [Key derivation](key_derivation/README.md)
- [Key exchange](key_exchange/README.md)
- [Advanced](advanced/README.md)
  - [SHA-2](advanced/sha-2_hash_function.md)
  - [HMAC-SHA-2](advanced/hmac-sha2.md)
  - [The Scrypt function](password_hashing/scrypt.md)
  - [Diffie-Hellman](advanced/scalar_multiplication.md)
  - [One-time authentication](advanced/poly1305.md)
  - [Stream ciphers](advanced/stream_ciphers.md)
    - [ChaCha20](advanced/chacha20.md)
    - [XChaCha20](advanced/xchacha20.md)
    - [Salsa20](advanced/salsa20.md)
    - [XSalsa20](advanced/xsalsa20.md)
  - [Ed25519 to Curve25519](advanced/ed25519-curve25519.md)
  - [Custom RNG](advanced/custom_rng.md)
- [Internals](internals/README.md)
- [Roadmap](internals/roadmap.md)
