ip_address_encryption/README.md, before:

# IP address encryption

The `crypto_ipcrypt` API provides efficient, secure encryption of IP addresses (IPv4 and IPv6) for privacy-preserving storage, logging, and analytics.

Unlike truncation (which irreversibly destroys data) or hashing (which prevents decryption), ipcrypt provides reversible encryption with well-defined security properties while maintaining operational utility.

## Use cases

  - Privacy-preserving logs: Encrypt IP addresses in web server access logs, DNS query logs, or application logs. Retain the ability to decrypt when needed for abuse investigation or incident response, while protecting user privacy during normal operations.

  - Rate limiting and abuse detection: Count requests per client, detect brute-force attempts, or implement request throttling using encrypted addresses. The deterministic mode ensures the same client maps to the same encrypted value, enabling consistent rate limiting without storing plaintext IPs.

  - Analytics without exposure: Count unique visitors, analyze geographic traffic patterns, or build user behavior analytics. Third-party analytics services receive encrypted addresses they cannot reverse.

  - Data sharing: Share network data with security researchers, cloud providers, or partner organizations. Share DDoS attack traffic for collaborative defense, submit malware samples with anonymized network indicators, or exchange threat intelligence.

  - Regulatory compliance: Store IP addresses in encrypted form to meet GDPR, CCPA, and similar privacy regulations. Maintain the ability to decrypt for lawful interception requests while minimizing exposure in case of data breaches.

  - Database storage: Store encrypted IP addresses in databases with indexes on the encrypted values (deterministic mode). Query, group, and sort by client without exposing actual addresses to database administrators or in backups.

## Variants

ipcrypt provides four variants with different security and format trade-offs:

| Variant | Key | Output | Properties |
| :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| Deterministic | 16 bytes | 16 bytes | Same input always produces same output; format-preserving |
| ND (non-deterministic) | 16 bytes | 24 bytes | Different output each time; 8-byte random tweak |
| NDX (extended non-deterministic) | 32 bytes | 32 bytes | Different output each time; 16-byte random tweak |
| PFX (prefix-preserving) | 32 bytes | 16 bytes | Preserves network prefix relationships |

### Choosing the right variant

Use deterministic mode for rate limiting, deduplication, unique visitor counting, database indexing, or anywhere you need to identify the same address across multiple observations. Fastest option. Trade-off: identical inputs produce identical outputs.

Use ND mode when sharing data externally or when preventing correlation across observations matters. Each encryption produces a different ciphertext, so an observer cannot tell if two records came from the same address. Good for log archival, third-party analytics, or data exports.

Use NDX mode for maximum security when you need the non-deterministic property and will perform very large numbers of encryptions (billions) with the same key. The larger tweak space provides a higher birthday bound.

Use PFX mode for network analysis applications: DDoS research, traffic studies, packet trace anonymization, or any scenario where understanding which addresses belong to the same network matters more than hiding that relationship.

## IP address representation

All variants operate on 16-byte values. IPv4 addresses are represented as IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses:

  - IPv6: Used directly (16 bytes in network byte order)
  - IPv4: Encoded as `::ffff:a.b.c.d` (10 zero bytes, `0xff 0xff`, then 4 IPv4 bytes)

For example, `192.0.2.1` is represented as:

    00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 ff ff c0 00 02 01

## Converting IP addresses

The `sodium_ip2bin()` and `sodium_bin2ip()` functions convert between string and binary representations.

``` c
int sodium_ip2bin(unsigned char bin[16], const char *ip, size_t ip_len);
```

The `sodium_ip2bin()` function parses the IP address string `ip` of length `ip_len` and writes the 16-byte binary representation to `bin`.

It accepts both IPv4 (e.g., `"192.0.2.1"`) and IPv6 (e.g., `"2001:db8::1"`) addresses. IPv4 addresses are automatically converted to IPv4-mapped format. IPv6 addresses with zone identifiers (e.g., `"fe80::1%eth0"`) are also supported.

Returns `0` on success, `-1` on error.

``` c
char *sodium_bin2ip(char *ip, size_t ip_maxlen, const unsigned char bin[16]);
```

The `sodium_bin2ip()` function converts the 16-byte binary address `bin` to a string and writes it to `ip`.

The buffer `ip` must be at least 16 bytes for IPv4 addresses or 46 bytes for IPv6 addresses. IPv4-mapped addresses are automatically converted to dotted-decimal notation.

Returns a pointer to `ip` on success, `NULL` on error.

## Deterministic encryption

The simplest variant encrypts an IP address to a 16-byte ciphertext. The same address with the same key always produces the same ciphertext.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                            const unsigned char *in,
                            const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                            const unsigned char *in,
                            const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the key `k` and writes the result to `out`.

The `crypto_ipcrypt_decrypt()` function reverses the encryption.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_keygen(unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_keygen()` function generates a random 16-byte key.

### Example (deterministic)

``` c
#include <sodium.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

int main(void)
{
    unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_KEYBYTES];
    unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES];
    unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES];
    unsigned char decrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES];
    char ip_str[46];

    if (sodium_init() < 0) {
        return 1;
    }

    /* Generate a random key */
    crypto_ipcrypt_keygen(key);

    /* Parse an IP address */
    if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, "192.0.2.1", strlen("192.0.2.1")) != 0) {
        return 1;
    }

    /* Encrypt */
    crypto_ipcrypt_encrypt(encrypted, addr, key);

    /* The encrypted address can be displayed as an IP */
    sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, encrypted);
    printf("Encrypted: %s\n", ip_str);

    /* Decrypt */
    crypto_ipcrypt_decrypt(decrypted, encrypted, key);

    /* Convert back to string */
    sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, decrypted);
    printf("Decrypted: %s\n", ip_str);  /* "192.0.2.1" */

    return 0;
}
```

### When to use deterministic mode

Use deterministic encryption when:

  - You need to identify duplicate addresses (rate limiting, deduplication)
  - Format preservation matters (output is also a valid IP representation)
  - Storage space is constrained

The trade-off is that identical addresses produce identical ciphertexts, allowing correlation analysis. An attacker who knows a specific address was encrypted can verify this by encrypting it with a guessed key.

## Non-deterministic encryption (ND)

The ND variant uses a random 8-byte tweak, ensuring the same address produces different ciphertexts each time.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_nd_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                               const unsigned char *in,
                               const unsigned char *t,
                               const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_nd_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                               const unsigned char *in,
                               const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_nd_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the key `k` and tweak `t`, writing the 24-byte result (tweak prepended to ciphertext) to `out`.

The `crypto_ipcrypt_nd_decrypt()` function decrypts a 24-byte ciphertext `in` (which includes the tweak) and writes the 16-byte address to `out`. No separate tweak parameter is needed because the tweak is extracted from the ciphertext.

### Example (ND)

``` c
unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char tweak[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_TWEAKBYTES];
unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_INPUTBYTES];
unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_OUTPUTBYTES];
unsigned char decrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_INPUTBYTES];
char ip_str[46];

crypto_ipcrypt_keygen(key);
randombytes_buf(tweak, sizeof tweak);

if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, "192.0.2.1", strlen("192.0.2.1")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}

crypto_ipcrypt_nd_encrypt(encrypted, addr, tweak, key);
crypto_ipcrypt_nd_decrypt(decrypted, encrypted, key);

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, decrypted);  /* "192.0.2.1" */
```

### When to use ND mode

Use ND encryption when:

  - Preventing correlation analysis is important
  - 24-byte output is acceptable
  - You’ll perform fewer than \~4 billion encryptions with the same key (birthday bound on 64-bit tweaks)

## Extended non-deterministic encryption (NDX)

The NDX variant provides larger tweaks and a larger key for higher security margins.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *t,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the 32-byte key `k` and 16-byte tweak `t`, writing the 32-byte result to `out`.

The `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_decrypt()` function decrypts a 32-byte ciphertext.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen(unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen()` function generates a random 32-byte key.

### Example (NDX)

``` c
unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char tweak[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_TWEAKBYTES];
unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_INPUTBYTES];
unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_OUTPUTBYTES];
unsigned char decrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_INPUTBYTES];
char ip_str[46];

crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen(key);
randombytes_buf(tweak, sizeof tweak);

if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, "2001:db8::1", strlen("2001:db8::1")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}

crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_encrypt(encrypted, addr, tweak, key);
crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_decrypt(decrypted, encrypted, key);

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, decrypted);  /* "2001:db8::1" */
```

### When to use NDX mode

Use NDX encryption when:

  - Maximum security is required
  - 32-byte output is acceptable
  - You want practically unlimited encryptions per key (\~2^64 birthday bound)

## Prefix-preserving encryption (PFX)

The PFX variant preserves network prefix relationships: addresses sharing a common prefix will have ciphertexts sharing a corresponding (different) prefix.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the 32-byte key `k` and writes the 16-byte result to `out`.

The address family is preserved: IPv4 addresses encrypt to IPv4 addresses.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen(unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen()` function generates a random 32-byte key.

### Example (PFX)

``` c
unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char addr1[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
unsigned char addr2[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
unsigned char enc1[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
unsigned char enc2[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
char ip_str[46];

crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen(key);

/* Encrypt two addresses in the same /24 */
if (sodium_ip2bin(addr1, "10.0.0.1", strlen("10.0.0.1")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}
if (sodium_ip2bin(addr2, "10.0.0.100", strlen("10.0.0.100")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}

crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(enc1, addr1, key);
crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(enc2, addr2, key);

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, enc1);
printf("10.0.0.1   -> %s\n", ip_str);  /* e.g., "79.55.98.17" */

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, enc2);
printf("10.0.0.100 -> %s\n", ip_str);  /* e.g., "79.55.98.127" - same /24 */
```

### When to use PFX mode

Use PFX encryption when you need to preserve network relationships for analysis while protecting individual addresses. Common applications include:

Network research and academic datasets

Share network measurement data (e.g., from CAIDA, RIPE Atlas, or university research) with collaborators while preserving the ability to analyze routing paths, AS relationships, and network topology. Researchers can study BGP behavior, CDN architectures, or internet mapping without exposing actual network identities.

DDoS attack analysis

Analyze attack traffic patterns across different networks and subnets. Security teams can identify whether attacks originate from the same /24 or /16 block, spot botnet clustering patterns, and share attack data with other organizations for collaborative defense - all without revealing actual source networks.

PCAP and NetFlow anonymization

Anonymize packet captures and flow records for archival, sharing, or compliance purposes. Unlike simple truncation, PFX encryption allows the data to be decrypted later if needed for incident response, while still enabling analysis of traffic patterns between subnets.

ISP and CDN traffic analysis

Analyze customer traffic patterns, peering relationships, and routing efficiency without exposing actual customer networks. Useful for capacity planning, traffic engineering studies, and performance optimization across geographic regions.

Firewall and IDS log aggregation

Aggregate security logs from multiple sources while preserving subnet relationships. This enables pattern detection across network boundaries (e.g., scanning activity targeting specific /24 blocks) without exposing internal network topology to log aggregation services.

Multi-organization threat intelligence sharing

Share network-level threat indicators with industry partners or ISACs (Information Sharing and Analysis Centers). Each organization uses the same key to enable correlation of threats across their collective infrastructure, while actual networks remain protected.

### Example: Analyzing attack origins by subnet

``` c
#include <sodium.h>
#include <stdio.h>

/* Anonymize attack source IPs while preserving subnet relationships */
void analyze_attack_sources(const char source_ips, size_t count,
                             const unsigned char *key)
{
    unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
    unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
    char enc_str[46];

    printf("Attack sources (encrypted, preserving /24 prefixes):\n");
    for (size_t i = 0; i < count; i++) {
        if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, source_ips[i], strlen(source_ips[i])) != 0) continue;

        crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(encrypted, addr, key);
        sodium_bin2ip(enc_str, sizeof enc_str, encrypted);

        /* Analysts can see which attacks come from the same subnet */
        printf("  %s\n", enc_str);
    }
}
```

### Trade-offs

PFX mode reveals network topology: addresses in the same subnet produce ciphertexts in a corresponding (encrypted) subnet. This is intentional and useful for the above applications, but means an observer can learn:

  - Which addresses share a common prefix (are in the same network)
  - The hierarchical relationship between addresses
  - Approximate network sizes

If hiding network relationships is required, use deterministic or non-deterministic modes instead.

## Algorithm details

  - Deterministic: Single-block AES-128
  - ND: KIASU-BC (tweakable AES-128 with 64-bit tweak)
  - NDX: AES-XTS (IEEE 1619-2007) with 128-bit tweak
  - PFX: Bit-by-bit format-preserving encryption using XOR of two AES-128 permutations

All implementations use hardware acceleration when available (AES-NI on x86-64, ARM Crypto extensions on ARM).

## Security considerations

What ipcrypt protects against:

  - Unauthorized parties learning original addresses without the key
  - Statistical analysis revealing traffic patterns (non-deterministic modes)
  - Brute-force attacks on the address space (128-bit AES security)

What ipcrypt does not protect against:

  - Active attackers modifying, reordering, or removing encrypted addresses
  - Correlation of identical addresses (deterministic mode)
  - Traffic analysis based on volume and timing metadata

Key management:

  - Generate keys using `crypto_ipcrypt_keygen()`, `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen()`, or `crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen()`
  - Never reuse keys across different variants; use HKDF to derive separate keys if needed
  - Rotate keys based on usage volume and security requirements

Tweak generation (ND/NDX modes):

  - Tweaks can be randomly generated using `randombytes_buf`.

## Constants

  - `crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_TWEAKBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_INPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_OUTPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_TWEAKBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_INPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_OUTPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES`

## Notes

This API was introduced in libsodium 1.0.21.

## See also

  - [ipcrypt specification](https://ipcrypt-std.github.io/)
  - [IETF draft](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-denis-ipcrypt/)

Commit message:

Improve  ip_address_encryption/README.md

ip_address_encryption/README.md, after:

# IP address encryption

The `crypto_ipcrypt` API provides efficient, secure encryption of IP addresses (IPv4 and IPv6) for privacy-preserving storage, logging, and analytics.

Unlike truncation (which irreversibly destroys data) or hashing (which prevents decryption), ipcrypt provides reversible encryption with well-defined security properties while maintaining operational utility.

## Use cases

  - Privacy-preserving logs: Encrypt IP addresses in web server access logs, DNS query logs, or application logs. Retain the ability to decrypt when needed for abuse investigation or incident response, while protecting user privacy during normal operations.

  - Rate limiting and abuse detection: Count requests per client, detect brute-force attempts, or implement request throttling using encrypted addresses. The deterministic mode ensures the same client maps to the same encrypted value, enabling consistent rate limiting without storing plaintext IPs.

  - Analytics without exposure: Count unique visitors, analyze geographic traffic patterns, or build user behavior analytics. Third-party analytics services receive encrypted addresses they cannot reverse.

  - Data sharing: Share network data with security researchers, cloud providers, or partner organizations. Share DDoS attack traffic for collaborative defense, submit malware samples with anonymized network indicators, or exchange threat intelligence.

  - Regulatory compliance: Store IP addresses in encrypted form to meet GDPR, CCPA, and similar privacy regulations. Maintain the ability to decrypt for lawful interception requests while minimizing exposure in case of data breaches.

  - Database storage: Store encrypted IP addresses in databases with indexes on the encrypted values (deterministic mode). Query, group, and sort by client without exposing actual addresses to database administrators or in backups.

## Variants

ipcrypt provides four variants with different security and format trade-offs:

| Variant | Key | Output | Properties |
| :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| Deterministic | 16 bytes | 16 bytes | Same input always produces same output; format-preserving |
| ND (non-deterministic) | 16 bytes | 24 bytes | Different output each time; 8-byte random tweak |
| NDX (extended non-deterministic) | 32 bytes | 32 bytes | Different output each time; 16-byte random tweak |
| PFX (prefix-preserving) | 32 bytes | 16 bytes | Preserves network prefix relationships |

### Choosing the right variant

Use deterministic mode for rate limiting, deduplication, unique visitor counting, database indexing, or anywhere you need to identify the same address across multiple observations. Fastest option. Trade-off: identical inputs produce identical outputs.

Use ND mode when sharing data externally or when preventing correlation across observations matters. Each encryption produces a different ciphertext, so an observer cannot tell if two records came from the same address. Good for log archival, third-party analytics, or data exports.

Use NDX mode for maximum security when you need the non-deterministic property and will perform very large numbers of encryptions (billions) with the same key. The larger tweak space provides a higher birthday bound.

Use PFX mode for network analysis applications: DDoS research, traffic studies, packet trace anonymization, or any scenario where understanding which addresses belong to the same network matters more than hiding that relationship.

## IP address representation

All variants operate on 16-byte values. IPv4 addresses are represented as IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses:

  - IPv6: Used directly (16 bytes in network byte order)
  - IPv4: Encoded as `::ffff:a.b.c.d` (10 zero bytes, `0xff 0xff`, then 4 IPv4 bytes)

For example, `192.0.2.1` is represented as:

    00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 ff ff c0 00 02 01

## Converting IP addresses

The `sodium_ip2bin()` and `sodium_bin2ip()` functions convert between string and binary representations.

``` c
int sodium_ip2bin(unsigned char bin[16], const char *ip, size_t ip_len);
```

The `sodium_ip2bin()` function parses the IP address string `ip` of length `ip_len` and writes the 16-byte binary representation to `bin`.

It accepts both IPv4 (e.g., `"192.0.2.1"`) and IPv6 (e.g., `"2001:db8::1"`) addresses. IPv4 addresses are automatically converted to IPv4-mapped format. IPv6 addresses with zone identifiers (e.g., `"fe80::1%eth0"`) are also supported.

Returns `0` on success, `-1` on error.

``` c
char *sodium_bin2ip(char *ip, size_t ip_maxlen, const unsigned char bin[16]);
```

The `sodium_bin2ip()` function converts the 16-byte binary address `bin` to a string and writes it to `ip`.

The buffer `ip` must be at least 16 bytes for IPv4 addresses or 46 bytes for IPv6 addresses. IPv4-mapped addresses are automatically converted to dotted-decimal notation.

Returns a pointer to `ip` on success, `NULL` on error.

## Deterministic encryption

The simplest variant encrypts an IP address to a 16-byte ciphertext. The same address with the same key always produces the same ciphertext.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                            const unsigned char *in,
                            const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                            const unsigned char *in,
                            const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the key `k` and writes the result to `out`.

The `crypto_ipcrypt_decrypt()` function reverses the encryption.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_keygen(unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_keygen()` function generates a random 16-byte key.

### Example (deterministic)

``` c
#include <sodium.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

int main(void)
{
    unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_KEYBYTES];
    unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES];
    unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES];
    unsigned char decrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES];
    char ip_str[46];

    if (sodium_init() < 0) {
        return 1;
    }

    /* Generate a random key */
    crypto_ipcrypt_keygen(key);

    /* Parse an IP address */
    if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, "192.0.2.1", strlen("192.0.2.1")) != 0) {
        return 1;
    }

    /* Encrypt */
    crypto_ipcrypt_encrypt(encrypted, addr, key);

    /* The encrypted address can be displayed as an IP */
    sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, encrypted);
    printf("Encrypted: %s\n", ip_str);

    /* Decrypt */
    crypto_ipcrypt_decrypt(decrypted, encrypted, key);

    /* Convert back to string */
    sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, decrypted);
    printf("Decrypted: %s\n", ip_str);  /* "192.0.2.1" */

    return 0;
}
```

### When to use deterministic mode

Use deterministic encryption when:

  - You need to identify duplicate addresses (rate limiting, deduplication)
  - Format preservation matters (output is also a valid IP representation)
  - Storage space is constrained

The trade-off is that identical addresses produce identical ciphertexts, allowing correlation analysis. An attacker who knows a specific address was encrypted can verify this by encrypting it with a guessed key.

## Non-deterministic encryption (ND)

The ND variant uses a random 8-byte tweak, ensuring the same address produces different ciphertexts each time.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_nd_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                               const unsigned char *in,
                               const unsigned char *t,
                               const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_nd_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                               const unsigned char *in,
                               const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_nd_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the key `k` and tweak `t`, writing the 24-byte result (tweak prepended to ciphertext) to `out`.

The `crypto_ipcrypt_nd_decrypt()` function decrypts a 24-byte ciphertext `in` (which includes the tweak) and writes the 16-byte address to `out`. No separate tweak parameter is needed because the tweak is extracted from the ciphertext.

### Example (ND)

``` c
unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char tweak[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_TWEAKBYTES];
unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_INPUTBYTES];
unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_OUTPUTBYTES];
unsigned char decrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_ND_INPUTBYTES];
char ip_str[46];

crypto_ipcrypt_keygen(key);
randombytes_buf(tweak, sizeof tweak);

if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, "192.0.2.1", strlen("192.0.2.1")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}

crypto_ipcrypt_nd_encrypt(encrypted, addr, tweak, key);
crypto_ipcrypt_nd_decrypt(decrypted, encrypted, key);

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, decrypted);  /* "192.0.2.1" */
```

### When to use ND mode

Use ND encryption when:

  - Preventing correlation analysis is important
  - 24-byte output is acceptable
  - You’ll perform fewer than \~4 billion encryptions with the same key (birthday bound on 64-bit tweaks)

## Extended non-deterministic encryption (NDX)

The NDX variant provides larger tweaks and a larger key for higher security margins.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *t,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the 32-byte key `k` and 16-byte tweak `t`, writing the 32-byte result to `out`.

The `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_decrypt()` function decrypts a 32-byte ciphertext.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen(unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen()` function generates a random 32-byte key.

### Example (NDX)

``` c
unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char tweak[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_TWEAKBYTES];
unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_INPUTBYTES];
unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_OUTPUTBYTES];
unsigned char decrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_INPUTBYTES];
char ip_str[46];

crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen(key);
randombytes_buf(tweak, sizeof tweak);

if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, "2001:db8::1", strlen("2001:db8::1")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}

crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_encrypt(encrypted, addr, tweak, key);
crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_decrypt(decrypted, encrypted, key);

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, decrypted);  /* "2001:db8::1" */
```

### When to use NDX mode

Use NDX encryption when:

  - Maximum security is required
  - 32-byte output is acceptable
  - You want practically unlimited encryptions per key (\~2^64 birthday bound)

## Prefix-preserving encryption (PFX)

The PFX variant preserves network prefix relationships: addresses sharing a common prefix will have ciphertexts sharing a corresponding (different) prefix.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_decrypt(unsigned char *out,
                                const unsigned char *in,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt()` function encrypts a 16-byte address `in` using the 32-byte key `k` and writes the 16-byte result to `out`.

The address family is preserved: IPv4 addresses encrypt to IPv4 addresses.

``` c
void crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen(unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen()` function generates a random 32-byte key.

### Example (PFX)

``` c
unsigned char key[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char addr1[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
unsigned char addr2[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
unsigned char enc1[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
unsigned char enc2[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
char ip_str[46];

crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen(key);

/* Encrypt two addresses in the same /24 */
if (sodium_ip2bin(addr1, "10.0.0.1", strlen("10.0.0.1")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}
if (sodium_ip2bin(addr2, "10.0.0.100", strlen("10.0.0.100")) != 0) {
    /* handle error */
}

crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(enc1, addr1, key);
crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(enc2, addr2, key);

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, enc1);
printf("10.0.0.1   -> %s\n", ip_str);  /* e.g., "79.55.98.17" */

sodium_bin2ip(ip_str, sizeof ip_str, enc2);
printf("10.0.0.100 -> %s\n", ip_str);  /* e.g., "79.55.98.127" - same /24 */
```

### When to use PFX mode

Use PFX encryption when you need to preserve network relationships for analysis while protecting individual addresses. Common applications include:

Network research and academic datasets

Share network measurement data (e.g., from CAIDA, RIPE Atlas, or university research) with collaborators while preserving the ability to analyze routing paths, AS relationships, and network topology. Researchers can study BGP behavior, CDN architectures, or internet mapping without exposing actual network identities.

DDoS attack analysis

Analyze attack traffic patterns across different networks and subnets. Security teams can identify whether attacks originate from the same /24 or /16 block, spot botnet clustering patterns, and share attack data with other organizations for collaborative defense - all without revealing actual source networks.

PCAP and NetFlow anonymization

Anonymize packet captures and flow records for archival, sharing, or compliance purposes. Unlike simple truncation, PFX encryption allows the data to be decrypted later if needed for incident response, while still enabling analysis of traffic patterns between subnets.

ISP and CDN traffic analysis

Analyze customer traffic patterns, peering relationships, and routing efficiency without exposing actual customer networks. Useful for capacity planning, traffic engineering studies, and performance optimization across geographic regions.

Firewall and IDS log aggregation

Aggregate security logs from multiple sources while preserving subnet relationships. This enables pattern detection across network boundaries (e.g., scanning activity targeting specific /24 blocks) without exposing internal network topology to log aggregation services.

Multi-organization threat intelligence sharing

Share network-level threat indicators with industry partners or ISACs (Information Sharing and Analysis Centers). Each organization uses the same key to enable correlation of threats across their collective infrastructure, while actual networks remain protected.

### Example: Analyzing attack origins by subnet

``` c
#include <sodium.h>
#include <stdio.h>

/* Anonymize attack source IPs while preserving subnet relationships */
void analyze_attack_sources(const char source_ips, size_t count,
                             const unsigned char *key)
{
    unsigned char addr[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
    unsigned char encrypted[crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES];
    char enc_str[46];

    printf("Attack sources (encrypted, preserving /24 prefixes):\n");
    for (size_t i = 0; i < count; i++) {
        if (sodium_ip2bin(addr, source_ips[i], strlen(source_ips[i])) != 0) continue;

        crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_encrypt(encrypted, addr, key);
        sodium_bin2ip(enc_str, sizeof enc_str, encrypted);

        /* Analysts can see which attacks come from the same subnet */
        printf("  %s\n", enc_str);
    }
}
```

### Trade-offs

PFX mode reveals network topology: addresses in the same subnet produce ciphertexts in a corresponding (encrypted) subnet. This is intentional and useful for the above applications, but means an observer can learn:

  - Which addresses share a common prefix (are in the same network)
  - The hierarchical relationship between addresses
  - Approximate network sizes

If hiding network relationships is required, use deterministic or non-deterministic modes instead.

## Algorithm details

  - Deterministic: Single-block AES-128
  - ND: KIASU-BC (tweakable AES-128 with 64-bit tweak)
  - NDX: AES-XTS (IEEE 1619-2007) with 128-bit tweak
  - PFX: Bit-by-bit format-preserving encryption using XOR of two AES-128 permutations

All implementations use hardware acceleration when available (AES-NI on x86-64, ARM Crypto extensions on ARM).

## Security considerations

What ipcrypt protects against:

  - Unauthorized parties learning original addresses without the key
  - Statistical analysis revealing traffic patterns (non-deterministic modes)
  - Brute-force attacks on the address space (128-bit AES security)

What ipcrypt does not protect against:

  - Active attackers modifying, reordering, or removing encrypted addresses
  - Correlation of identical addresses (deterministic mode)
  - Traffic analysis based on volume and timing metadata

Key management:

  - Generate keys using `crypto_ipcrypt_keygen()`, `crypto_ipcrypt_ndx_keygen()`, or `crypto_ipcrypt_pfx_keygen()`
  - Never reuse keys across different variants; use HKDF to derive separate keys if needed
  - Rotate keys based on usage volume and security requirements

Tweak generation (ND/NDX modes):

  - Tweaks can be randomly generated using `randombytes_buf`.

## Why encryption instead of truncation?

Truncating IP addresses (zeroing out the last octet or bits) is a common but flawed approach to anonymization.

Truncation doesn’t provide meaningful anonymity: subnet size doesn’t correlate with user anonymity. A `/24` network might serve only one small company with a handful of employees online at any given time, making individual identification trivial through WHOIS queries and ISP records. Even after truncation, the retained prefix reveals the Internet Service Provider, geographic location (often down to city level), and organization.

IPv6 makes truncation nearly useless: unlike IPv4, IPv6 has no standardized truncation boundaries. A household might receive an entire `/48` allocation, trillions of addresses going to one router. There’s no consistent “last octet” to remove.

Truncated IPs remain personal data: under GDPR and similar regulations, truncated addresses combined with timestamps, user agents, request paths, and other metadata often create unique fingerprints that identify individuals. Courts and regulators have consistently held that such combinations constitute personal data.

Truncation is irreversible: once truncated, legitimate needs like abuse investigation, incident response, or lawful interception requests cannot be satisfied. Encryption preserves the ability to recover the original address when operationally or legally necessary.

Encryption addresses these problems: without the key, an attacker cannot determine the original address regardless of subnet size, and the full address remains recoverable when needed. When irreversibility is desired, simply wipe the key. This provides the same outcome as truncation while allowing you to choose when that transition happens. Keys can also be rotated on a schedule (daily, weekly) so that older data becomes permanently unrecoverable after the retention period, combining the benefits of both approaches.

## Constants

  - `crypto_ipcrypt_BYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_TWEAKBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_INPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_ND_OUTPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_TWEAKBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_INPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_NDX_OUTPUTBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_KEYBYTES`
  - `crypto_ipcrypt_PFX_BYTES`

## Notes

This API was introduced in libsodium 1.0.21.

## See also

  - [ipcrypt specification](https://ipcrypt-std.github.io/)
  - [IETF draft](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-denis-ipcrypt/)
