# AES-128-CTR

Sodium provides a software bitsliced implementation of AES-128 in counter mode written by Peter Schwabe and Emilia Käsper, which resists all cache timing attacks.

## Usage

```c
int crypto_stream_aes128ctr(unsigned char *out, unsigned long long outlen,
                            const unsigned char *n, const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_stream_aes128ctr()` function stores `outlen` pseudo random bytes into `out` using the secret key `k` (`crypto_stream_aes128ctr_KEYBYTES` bytes) and the nonce `n` (`crypto_stream_aes128ctr_NONCEBYTES` bytes).

The output is generated by computing `AES128(n,k), AES128(n+1,k), AES128(n+2,k), ...` until enough 16-bytes blocks have been generated to match `outlen`.

```c
int crypto_stream_aes128ctr_xor(unsigned char *out, const unsigned char *in,
                                unsigned long long inlen, const unsigned char *n,
                                const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_stream_aes128ctr_xor()` function encrypts a message `in` whose length is `inlen` bytes using a secret key `k` (`crypto_stream_aes128ctr_KEYBYTES` bytes) and a nonce `n` (`crypto_stream_aes128ctr_NONCEBYTES` bytes).

The output is stored into `out`.

In this mode, the same operation can be used both for encryption and decryption.

`in` and `out` can point to the same address (in-place encryption/decryption). If they don't, the regions should not overlap.

## Constants

- `crypto_stream_aes128ctr_KEYBYTES`
- `crypto_stream_aes128ctr_NONCEBYTES`

## Notes

`crypto_stream_aes128ctr()` doesn't have an internal counter: the nonce itself is incremented after each 16-bytes block. As a result, extreme care should be taken to avoid reusing a nonce with the same key.

Unless using AES is a requirement, you should consider  `crypto_stream` (XSalsa20) or `crypto_stream_chacha20` (ChaCha20) instead.

`crypto_stream_aes128ctr_xor()` simply combines the message with the output of the stream cipher with the XOR operation, and does not add any authentication tag.

Unless this is exactly what you need, you should use `crypto_secretbox()` or `crypto_box()` instead.
