advanced/aes-256-gcm.md, before:

# Authenticated Encryption with Additional Data using AES-GCM

## Example

```c
#include <sodium.h>

#define MESSAGE (const unsigned char *) "test"
#define MESSAGE_LEN 4
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA (const unsigned char *) "123456"
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN 6

unsigned char nonce[crypto_aead_aes256gcm_NPUBBYTES];
unsigned char key[crypto_aead_aes256gcm_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char ciphertext[MESSAGE_LEN + crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES];
unsigned long long ciphertext_len;

sodium_init();
if (crypto_aead_aes256gcm_is_available() == 0) {
    abort(); /* Not available on this CPU */
}

randombytes_buf(key, sizeof key);
randombytes_buf(nonce, sizeof nonce);

crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt(ciphertext, &ciphertext_len,
                              MESSAGE, MESSAGE_LEN,
                              ADDITIONAL_DATA, ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                              NULL, nonce, key);

unsigned char decrypted[MESSAGE_LEN];
unsigned long long decrypted_len;
if (ciphertext_len < crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES ||
    crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt(decrypted, &decrypted_len,
                                  NULL,
                                  ciphertext, ciphertext_len,
                                  ADDITIONAL_DATA,
                                  ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                                  nonce, key) != 0) {
    /* message forged! */
}
```

## Purpose

This operation:
- Encrypts a message with a key and a nonce to keep it confidential
- Computes an authentication tag. This tag is used to make sure that the message, as well as optional, non-confidential (non-encrypted) data, haven't been tampered with.

A typical use case for additional data is to store protocol-specific metadata about the message, such as its length and encoding.

It can also be used as a MAC, with an empty message.

Decryption will never be performed, even partially, before verification.

When supported by the CPU, AES-GCM is the fastest AEAD cipher available in this library.

## Limitations

The current implementation of this construction is hardware-accelerated and requires the Intel SSSE3 extensions, as well as the `aesni` and `pclmul` instructions.

Intel Westmere processors (introduced in 2010) and newer meet the requirements.

There are no plans to support non hardware-accelerated implementations of AES-GCM. If portability is a concern, use ChaCha20-Poly1305 instead.

## Usage

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_is_available(void);
```

Returns `1` if the current CPU supports the AES256-GCM implementation, and `0` if it doesn't.

The library must have been initialized with `sodium_init()` prior to calling this function. 

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt(unsigned char *c,
                                  unsigned long long *clen,
                                  const unsigned char *m,
                                  unsigned long long mlen,
                                  const unsigned char *ad,
                                  unsigned long long adlen,
                                  const unsigned char *nsec,
                                  const unsigned char *npub,
                                  const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt()` function encrypts a message `m` whose length is `mlen` bytes using a secret key `k` (`crypto_aead_aes256gcm_KEYBYTES` bytes) and a public nonce `npub` (`crypto_aead_aes256gcm_NPUBBYTES` bytes).

The encrypted message, as well as a tag authenticating both the confidential message `m` and `adlen` bytes of non-confidential data `ad`, are put into `c`.

`ad` can also be a `NULL` pointer if no additional data are required.

At most `mlen + crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES` bytes are put into `c`, and the actual number of bytes is stored into `clen` if `clen` is not a `NULL` pointer.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The function always returns `0`.

The public nonce `npub` should never ever be reused with the same key. The recommended way to generate it is to use `randombytes_buf()` for the first message, and increment it for each subsequent message using the same key.

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt(unsigned char *m,
                                  unsigned long long *mlen,
                                  unsigned char *nsec,
                                  const unsigned char *c,
                                  unsigned long long clen,
                                  const unsigned char *ad,
                                  unsigned long long adlen,
                                  const unsigned char *npub,
                                  const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt()` function verifies that the ciphertext `c` (as produced by `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt()`), includes a valid tag using a secret key `k`, a public nonce `npub`, and additional data `ad` (`adlen` bytes).
`clen` is the ciphertext length in bytes with the authenticator, so it has to be at least `aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES`.

`ad` can be a `NULL` pointer if no additional data are required.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The function returns `-1` is the verification fails.

If the verification succeeds, the function returns `0`, puts the decrypted message into `m` and stores its actual number of bytes into `mlen` if `mlen` is not a `NULL` pointer.

At most `clen - crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES` bytes will be put into `m`.

## Precalculation interface

Applications that encrypt several messages using the same key can gain a little speed by expanding the AES key only once, via the precalculation interface.

```
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_beforenm(crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state *ctx_,
                                   const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_beforenm()` function initializes a context `ctx` by expanding the key `k`.

A 16 bytes alignment is required for the address of `ctx`. The size of this value can be obtained using `sizeof(crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state)`, or `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_statebytes()`.

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt_afternm(unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long *clen_p,
                                          const unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long mlen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state *ctx_);
```

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt_afternm(unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long *mlen_p,
                                          unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long clen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state *ctx_);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt_afternm()` and `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt_afternm()` functions are identical to `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt()` and `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt()`, but accept a previously initialized context `ctx` instead of a key.

## Constants

- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_KEYBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_NPUBBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES`

## Data types

- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state`

## Notes

The nonce is 96 bits long. In order to prevent nonce reuse, if a key is being reused, it is recommended to increment the previous nonce instead of generating a random nonce for each message.
To prevent nonce reuse in a client-server protocol, either use different keys for each direction, or make sure that a bit is masked in one direction, and set in the other.

Support for AES256-GCM was introduced in Libsodium 1.0.4.

Commit message:

Recommend splitting messages > 2 Gb into smaller chunks

advanced/aes-256-gcm.md, after:

# Authenticated Encryption with Additional Data using AES-GCM

## Example

```c
#include <sodium.h>

#define MESSAGE (const unsigned char *) "test"
#define MESSAGE_LEN 4
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA (const unsigned char *) "123456"
#define ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN 6

unsigned char nonce[crypto_aead_aes256gcm_NPUBBYTES];
unsigned char key[crypto_aead_aes256gcm_KEYBYTES];
unsigned char ciphertext[MESSAGE_LEN + crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES];
unsigned long long ciphertext_len;

sodium_init();
if (crypto_aead_aes256gcm_is_available() == 0) {
    abort(); /* Not available on this CPU */
}

randombytes_buf(key, sizeof key);
randombytes_buf(nonce, sizeof nonce);

crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt(ciphertext, &ciphertext_len,
                              MESSAGE, MESSAGE_LEN,
                              ADDITIONAL_DATA, ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                              NULL, nonce, key);

unsigned char decrypted[MESSAGE_LEN];
unsigned long long decrypted_len;
if (ciphertext_len < crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES ||
    crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt(decrypted, &decrypted_len,
                                  NULL,
                                  ciphertext, ciphertext_len,
                                  ADDITIONAL_DATA,
                                  ADDITIONAL_DATA_LEN,
                                  nonce, key) != 0) {
    /* message forged! */
}
```

## Purpose

This operation:
- Encrypts a message with a key and a nonce to keep it confidential
- Computes an authentication tag. This tag is used to make sure that the message, as well as optional, non-confidential (non-encrypted) data, haven't been tampered with.

A typical use case for additional data is to store protocol-specific metadata about the message, such as its length and encoding.

It can also be used as a MAC, with an empty message.

Decryption will never be performed, even partially, before verification.

When supported by the CPU, AES-GCM is the fastest AEAD cipher available in this library.

## Limitations

The current implementation of this construction is hardware-accelerated and requires the Intel SSSE3 extensions, as well as the `aesni` and `pclmul` instructions.

Intel Westmere processors (introduced in 2010) and newer meet the requirements.

There are no plans to support non hardware-accelerated implementations of AES-GCM. If portability is a concern, use ChaCha20-Poly1305 instead.

## Usage

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_is_available(void);
```

Returns `1` if the current CPU supports the AES256-GCM implementation, and `0` if it doesn't.

The library must have been initialized with `sodium_init()` prior to calling this function. 

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt(unsigned char *c,
                                  unsigned long long *clen,
                                  const unsigned char *m,
                                  unsigned long long mlen,
                                  const unsigned char *ad,
                                  unsigned long long adlen,
                                  const unsigned char *nsec,
                                  const unsigned char *npub,
                                  const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt()` function encrypts a message `m` whose length is `mlen` bytes using a secret key `k` (`crypto_aead_aes256gcm_KEYBYTES` bytes) and a public nonce `npub` (`crypto_aead_aes256gcm_NPUBBYTES` bytes).

The encrypted message, as well as a tag authenticating both the confidential message `m` and `adlen` bytes of non-confidential data `ad`, are put into `c`.

`ad` can also be a `NULL` pointer if no additional data are required.

At most `mlen + crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES` bytes are put into `c`, and the actual number of bytes is stored into `clen` if `clen` is not a `NULL` pointer.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The function always returns `0`.

The public nonce `npub` should never ever be reused with the same key. The recommended way to generate it is to use `randombytes_buf()` for the first message, and increment it for each subsequent message using the same key.

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt(unsigned char *m,
                                  unsigned long long *mlen,
                                  unsigned char *nsec,
                                  const unsigned char *c,
                                  unsigned long long clen,
                                  const unsigned char *ad,
                                  unsigned long long adlen,
                                  const unsigned char *npub,
                                  const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt()` function verifies that the ciphertext `c` (as produced by `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt()`), includes a valid tag using a secret key `k`, a public nonce `npub`, and additional data `ad` (`adlen` bytes).
`clen` is the ciphertext length in bytes with the authenticator, so it has to be at least `aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES`.

`ad` can be a `NULL` pointer if no additional data are required.

`nsec` is not used by this particular construction and should always be `NULL`.

The function returns `-1` is the verification fails.

If the verification succeeds, the function returns `0`, puts the decrypted message into `m` and stores its actual number of bytes into `mlen` if `mlen` is not a `NULL` pointer.

At most `clen - crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES` bytes will be put into `m`.

## Precalculation interface

Applications that encrypt several messages using the same key can gain a little speed by expanding the AES key only once, via the precalculation interface.

```
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_beforenm(crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state *ctx_,
                                   const unsigned char *k);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_beforenm()` function initializes a context `ctx` by expanding the key `k`.

A 16 bytes alignment is required for the address of `ctx`. The size of this value can be obtained using `sizeof(crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state)`, or `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_statebytes()`.

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt_afternm(unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long *clen_p,
                                          const unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long mlen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state *ctx_);
```

```c
int crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt_afternm(unsigned char *m,
                                          unsigned long long *mlen_p,
                                          unsigned char *nsec,
                                          const unsigned char *c,
                                          unsigned long long clen,
                                          const unsigned char *ad,
                                          unsigned long long adlen,
                                          const unsigned char *npub,
                                          const crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state *ctx_);
```

The `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt_afternm()` and `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt_afternm()` functions are identical to `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_encrypt()` and `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_decrypt()`, but accept a previously initialized context `ctx` instead of a key.

## Constants

- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_KEYBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_NPUBBYTES`
- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_ABYTES`

## Data types

- `crypto_aead_aes256gcm_state`

## Notes

The nonce is 96 bits long. In order to prevent nonce reuse, if a key is being reused, it is recommended to increment the previous nonce instead of generating a random nonce for each message.
To prevent nonce reuse in a client-server protocol, either use different keys for each direction, or make sure that a bit is masked in one direction, and set in the other.

It is recommended to split message larger than 2 Gb into smaller chunks.

Support for AES256-GCM was introduced in Libsodium 1.0.4.
