advanced/scalar_multiplication.md, before:

# Diffie-Hellman function

Sodium provides an API to perform scalar multiplication of elliptic curve points.

This can be used as a building block to construct key exchange mechanisms, or
more generally to compute a public key from a secret key.

On current libsodium versions, you generally want to use the
[`crypto_kx`](../key_exchange/README.md) API for key exchange instead.

## Usage

```c
int crypto_scalarmult_base(unsigned char *q, const unsigned char *n);
```

Given a user's secret key `n` \(`crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES` bytes\), the
`crypto_scalarmult_base()` function computes the user's public key and puts it
into `q` \(`crypto_scalarmult_BYTES` bytes\).

`crypto_scalarmult_BYTES` and `crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES` are provided for
consistency, but it is safe to assume that `crypto_scalarmult_BYTES ==
crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES`.

```c
int crypto_scalarmult(unsigned char *q, const unsigned char *n,
                      const unsigned char *p);
```

This function can be used to compute a shared secret `q` given a user's secret
key and another user's public key.

`n` is `crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES` bytes long, `p` and the output are
`crypto_scalarmult_BYTES` bytes long.

`q` represents the X coordinate of a point on the curve. As a result, the number
of possible keys is limited to the group size \(≈2^252\), which is smaller than
the key space.

For this reason, and to mitigate subtle attacks due to the fact many (`p`, `n`)
pairs produce the same result, using the output of the multiplication `q`
directly as a shared key is not recommended.

A better way to compute a shared key is `h(q ‖ pk1 ‖ pk2)`, with `pk1` and `pk2`
being the public keys.

This can be achieved with the following code snippet:

```c
unsigned char client_publickey[crypto_box_PUBLICKEYBYTES];
unsigned char client_secretkey[crypto_box_SECRETKEYBYTES];
unsigned char server_publickey[crypto_box_PUBLICKEYBYTES];
unsigned char server_secretkey[crypto_box_SECRETKEYBYTES];
unsigned char scalarmult_q_by_client[crypto_scalarmult_BYTES];
unsigned char scalarmult_q_by_server[crypto_scalarmult_BYTES];
unsigned char sharedkey_by_client[crypto_generichash_BYTES];
unsigned char sharedkey_by_server[crypto_generichash_BYTES];
crypto_generichash_state h;

/* Create client's secret and public keys */
randombytes_buf(client_secretkey, sizeof client_secretkey);
crypto_scalarmult_base(client_publickey, client_secretkey);

/* Create server's secret and public keys */
randombytes_buf(server_secretkey, sizeof server_secretkey);
crypto_scalarmult_base(server_publickey, server_secretkey);
```

```c
/* The client derives a shared key from its secret key and the server's public key */
/* shared key = h(q ‖ client_publickey ‖ server_publickey) */
if (crypto_scalarmult(scalarmult_q_by_client, client_secretkey, server_publickey) != 0) {
    /* Error */
}
crypto_generichash_init(&h, NULL, 0U, sizeof sharedkey_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, scalarmult_q_by_client, sizeof scalarmult_q_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, client_publickey, sizeof client_publickey);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, server_publickey, sizeof server_publickey);
crypto_generichash_final(&h, sharedkey_by_client, sizeof sharedkey_by_client);
```

```c
/* The server derives a shared key from its secret key and the client's public key */
/* shared key = h(q ‖ client_publickey ‖ server_publickey) */
if (crypto_scalarmult(scalarmult_q_by_server, server_secretkey, client_publickey) != 0) {
    /* Error */
}
crypto_generichash_init(&h, NULL, 0U, sizeof sharedkey_by_server);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, scalarmult_q_by_server, sizeof scalarmult_q_by_server);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, client_publickey, sizeof client_publickey);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, server_publickey, sizeof server_publickey);
crypto_generichash_final(&h, sharedkey_by_server, sizeof sharedkey_by_server);

/* sharedkey_by_client and sharedkey_by_server are identical */
```

If the intent is to create 256-bit keys (or less) for encryption, the final hash
can also be set to output 512 bits: the first half can be used as a key to
encrypt in one direction (for example from the server to the client), and the
other half can be used in the other direction.

When using counters as nonces, having distinct keys allows the client and the
server to safely send multiple messages without having to wait from an
acknowledgment after each message.

```c
typedef struct kx_session_keypair {
    unsigned char rx[32];
    unsigned char tx[32];
} kx_session_keypair;

kx_session_keypair kp;

if (crypto_scalarmult(scalarmult_q_by_client, client_secretkey, server_publickey) != 0) {
    /* Error */
}
crypto_generichash_init(&h, NULL, 0U, sizeof session_keypair_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, scalarmult_q_by_client, sizeof scalarmult_q_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, client_publickey, sizeof client_publickey);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, server_publickey, sizeof server_publickey);
crypto_generichash_final(&h, session_keypair_by_client, sizeof session_keypair_by_client);
```

`kp->tx` is a key that the server can use in order to encrypt data sent to the
client, and `kp->rx` is a key that can be used in the opposite direction.

## Constants

* `crypto_scalarmult_BYTES`
* `crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES`

## Algorithm details

* X25519 \(ECDH over Curve25519\) -
  [RFC 7748](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7748.txt)

Commit message:

Don't call scalar multiplication a Diffie-Hellman exchange
And now that the same operation can be performed on Curve25519,
Ed25519 and Ristretto, the documentation should be reorganized
a little bit.

advanced/scalar_multiplication.md, after:

# Point\*scalar multiplication (X25519)

Sodium provides an API to multiply a point on the Curve25519 curve.

This can be used as a building block to construct key exchange mechanisms, or more generally to compute a public key from a secret key.

On current libsodium versions, you generally want to use the
[`crypto_kx`](../key_exchange/README.md) API for key exchange instead.

## Usage

```c
int crypto_scalarmult_base(unsigned char *q, const unsigned char *n);
```

Given a user's secret key `n` \(`crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES` bytes\), the
`crypto_scalarmult_base()` function computes the user's public key and puts it
into `q` \(`crypto_scalarmult_BYTES` bytes\).

`crypto_scalarmult_BYTES` and `crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES` are provided for
consistency, but it is safe to assume that `crypto_scalarmult_BYTES ==
crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES`.

```c
int crypto_scalarmult(unsigned char *q, const unsigned char *n,
                      const unsigned char *p);
```

This function can be used to compute a shared secret `q` given a user's secret
key and another user's public key.

`n` is `crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES` bytes long, `p` and the output are
`crypto_scalarmult_BYTES` bytes long.

`q` represents the X coordinate of a point on the curve. As a result, the number
of possible keys is limited to the group size \(≈2^252\), which is smaller than
the key space.

For this reason, and to mitigate subtle attacks due to the fact many (`p`, `n`)
pairs produce the same result, using the output of the multiplication `q`
directly as a shared key is not recommended.

A better way to compute a shared key is `h(q ‖ pk1 ‖ pk2)`, with `pk1` and `pk2`
being the public keys.

This can be achieved with the following code snippet:

```c
unsigned char client_publickey[crypto_box_PUBLICKEYBYTES];
unsigned char client_secretkey[crypto_box_SECRETKEYBYTES];
unsigned char server_publickey[crypto_box_PUBLICKEYBYTES];
unsigned char server_secretkey[crypto_box_SECRETKEYBYTES];
unsigned char scalarmult_q_by_client[crypto_scalarmult_BYTES];
unsigned char scalarmult_q_by_server[crypto_scalarmult_BYTES];
unsigned char sharedkey_by_client[crypto_generichash_BYTES];
unsigned char sharedkey_by_server[crypto_generichash_BYTES];
crypto_generichash_state h;

/* Create client's secret and public keys */
randombytes_buf(client_secretkey, sizeof client_secretkey);
crypto_scalarmult_base(client_publickey, client_secretkey);

/* Create server's secret and public keys */
randombytes_buf(server_secretkey, sizeof server_secretkey);
crypto_scalarmult_base(server_publickey, server_secretkey);
```

```c
/* The client derives a shared key from its secret key and the server's public key */
/* shared key = h(q ‖ client_publickey ‖ server_publickey) */
if (crypto_scalarmult(scalarmult_q_by_client, client_secretkey, server_publickey) != 0) {
    /* Error */
}
crypto_generichash_init(&h, NULL, 0U, sizeof sharedkey_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, scalarmult_q_by_client, sizeof scalarmult_q_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, client_publickey, sizeof client_publickey);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, server_publickey, sizeof server_publickey);
crypto_generichash_final(&h, sharedkey_by_client, sizeof sharedkey_by_client);
```

```c
/* The server derives a shared key from its secret key and the client's public key */
/* shared key = h(q ‖ client_publickey ‖ server_publickey) */
if (crypto_scalarmult(scalarmult_q_by_server, server_secretkey, client_publickey) != 0) {
    /* Error */
}
crypto_generichash_init(&h, NULL, 0U, sizeof sharedkey_by_server);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, scalarmult_q_by_server, sizeof scalarmult_q_by_server);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, client_publickey, sizeof client_publickey);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, server_publickey, sizeof server_publickey);
crypto_generichash_final(&h, sharedkey_by_server, sizeof sharedkey_by_server);

/* sharedkey_by_client and sharedkey_by_server are identical */
```

If the intent is to create 256-bit keys (or less) for encryption, the final hash
can also be set to output 512 bits: the first half can be used as a key to
encrypt in one direction (for example from the server to the client), and the
other half can be used in the other direction.

When using counters as nonces, having distinct keys allows the client and the
server to safely send multiple messages without having to wait from an
acknowledgment after each message.

```c
typedef struct kx_session_keypair {
    unsigned char rx[32];
    unsigned char tx[32];
} kx_session_keypair;

kx_session_keypair kp;

if (crypto_scalarmult(scalarmult_q_by_client, client_secretkey, server_publickey) != 0) {
    /* Error */
}
crypto_generichash_init(&h, NULL, 0U, sizeof session_keypair_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, scalarmult_q_by_client, sizeof scalarmult_q_by_client);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, client_publickey, sizeof client_publickey);
crypto_generichash_update(&h, server_publickey, sizeof server_publickey);
crypto_generichash_final(&h, session_keypair_by_client, sizeof session_keypair_by_client);
```

`kp->tx` is a key that the server can use in order to encrypt data sent to the
client, and `kp->rx` is a key that can be used in the opposite direction.

## Constants

* `crypto_scalarmult_BYTES`
* `crypto_scalarmult_SCALARBYTES`

## Algorithm details

* X25519 \(ECDH over Curve25519\) -
  [RFC 7748](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7748.txt)
