advanced/sha-2_hash_function.md, before:

# The SHA-2 hash functions family

The SHA-256 and SHA-512 functions are provided for interoperability with other
applications.

These functions are not keyed and are thus deterministic. In addition, the
untruncated versions are vulnerable to length extension attacks.

A message can be hashed in a single pass, but a streaming API is also available
to process a message as a sequence of multiple chunks.

If you are looking for a generic hash function and not specifically SHA-2, using
`crypto_generichash()` (BLAKE2b) might be a better choice.

These functions are also not suitable for hashing passwords. For this purpose,
use the `crypto_pwhash` API documented in the Password Hashing section.

## Single-part SHA-256 example

```c
#define MESSAGE ((const unsigned char *) "test")
#define MESSAGE_LEN 4

unsigned char out[crypto_hash_sha256_BYTES];

crypto_hash_sha256(out, MESSAGE, MESSAGE_LEN);
```

## Multi-part SHA-256 example

```c
#define MESSAGE_PART1 \
    ((const unsigned char *) "Arbitrary data to hash")
#define MESSAGE_PART1_LEN 22

#define MESSAGE_PART2 \
    ((const unsigned char *) "is longer than expected")
#define MESSAGE_PART2_LEN 23

unsigned char out[crypto_hash_sha256_BYTES];
crypto_hash_sha256_state state;

crypto_hash_sha256_init(&state);

crypto_hash_sha256_update(&state, MESSAGE_PART1, MESSAGE_PART1_LEN);
crypto_hash_sha256_update(&state, MESSAGE_PART2, MESSAGE_PART2_LEN);

crypto_hash_sha256_final(&state, out);
```

## Usage

### SHA-256

Single-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha256(unsigned char *out, const unsigned char *in,
                       unsigned long long inlen);
```

Multi-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha256_init(crypto_hash_sha256_state *state);

int crypto_hash_sha256_update(crypto_hash_sha256_state *state,
                              const unsigned char *in,
                              unsigned long long inlen);

int crypto_hash_sha256_final(crypto_hash_sha256_state *state,
                             unsigned char *out);
```

### SHA-512

Single-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha512(unsigned char *out, const unsigned char *in,
                       unsigned long long inlen);
```

Multi-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha512_init(crypto_hash_sha512_state *state);

int crypto_hash_sha512_update(crypto_hash_sha512_state *state,
                              const unsigned char *in,
                              unsigned long long inlen);

int crypto_hash_sha512_final(crypto_hash_sha512_state *state,
                             unsigned char *out);
```

## Notes

The state must be initialized with `crypto_hash_sha*_init()` before updating or
finalizing it.

After `crypto_hash_sha*_final()`, the state should not be used any more, unless
it is reinitialized using `crypto_hash_sha*_init()`.

SHA-512-256 is also available via the higher-level interface `crypto_hash()`.

## Constants

* `crypto_hash_sha256_BYTES`
* `crypto_hash_sha512_BYTES`

## Data types

* `crypto_hash_sha256_state`
* `crypto_hash_sha512_state`

Commit message:

sha2: move the "consider something else" bits to the top
also linked the relevant APIs, so people leave this page
more quickly :)

advanced/sha-2_hash_function.md, after:

# The SHA-2 hash functions family

The SHA-256 and SHA-512 functions are provided for interoperability
with other applications. If you are looking for a generic hash
function and not specifically SHA-2, using
[`crypto_generichash()`](../hashing/generic_hashing.md) (BLAKE2b)
might be a better choice.

These functions are also not suitable for hashing passwords or
deriving keys from passwords. Use one of the
[password hashing](../password_hashing/README.md) APIs instead.

These functions are not keyed and are thus deterministic. In addition, the
untruncated versions are vulnerable to length extension attacks.

A message can be hashed in a single pass, but a streaming API is also available
to process a message as a sequence of multiple chunks.

## Single-part SHA-256 example

```c
#define MESSAGE ((const unsigned char *) "test")
#define MESSAGE_LEN 4

unsigned char out[crypto_hash_sha256_BYTES];

crypto_hash_sha256(out, MESSAGE, MESSAGE_LEN);
```

## Multi-part SHA-256 example

```c
#define MESSAGE_PART1 \
    ((const unsigned char *) "Arbitrary data to hash")
#define MESSAGE_PART1_LEN 22

#define MESSAGE_PART2 \
    ((const unsigned char *) "is longer than expected")
#define MESSAGE_PART2_LEN 23

unsigned char out[crypto_hash_sha256_BYTES];
crypto_hash_sha256_state state;

crypto_hash_sha256_init(&state);

crypto_hash_sha256_update(&state, MESSAGE_PART1, MESSAGE_PART1_LEN);
crypto_hash_sha256_update(&state, MESSAGE_PART2, MESSAGE_PART2_LEN);

crypto_hash_sha256_final(&state, out);
```

## Usage

### SHA-256

Single-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha256(unsigned char *out, const unsigned char *in,
                       unsigned long long inlen);
```

Multi-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha256_init(crypto_hash_sha256_state *state);

int crypto_hash_sha256_update(crypto_hash_sha256_state *state,
                              const unsigned char *in,
                              unsigned long long inlen);

int crypto_hash_sha256_final(crypto_hash_sha256_state *state,
                             unsigned char *out);
```

### SHA-512

Single-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha512(unsigned char *out, const unsigned char *in,
                       unsigned long long inlen);
```

Multi-part:

```c
int crypto_hash_sha512_init(crypto_hash_sha512_state *state);

int crypto_hash_sha512_update(crypto_hash_sha512_state *state,
                              const unsigned char *in,
                              unsigned long long inlen);

int crypto_hash_sha512_final(crypto_hash_sha512_state *state,
                             unsigned char *out);
```

## Notes

The state must be initialized with `crypto_hash_sha*_init()` before updating or
finalizing it.

After `crypto_hash_sha*_final()`, the state should not be used any more, unless
it is reinitialized using `crypto_hash_sha*_init()`.

SHA-512-256 is also available via the higher-level interface `crypto_hash()`.

## Constants

* `crypto_hash_sha256_BYTES`
* `crypto_hash_sha512_BYTES`

## Data types

* `crypto_hash_sha256_state`
* `crypto_hash_sha512_state`
