usage/README.md, before:

# Usage

```c
#include <sodium.h>

int main(void)
{
    if (sodium_init() == -1) {
        return 1;
    }
    ...
}
```

`sodium.h` is the only header that has to be included.

The library is called `sodium` \(use `-lsodium` to link it\), and proper
compilation/linker flags can be obtained using `pkg-config` on systems where it
is available:

```bash
CFLAGS=$(pkg-config --cflags libsodium)
LDFLAGS=$(pkg-config --libs libsodium)
```

For static linking, Visual Studio users should define `SODIUM_STATIC=1` and
`SODIUM_EXPORT=`. This is not required on other platforms.

Projects using CMake can include the
[Findsodium.cmake](https://github.com/facebookincubator/fizz/blob/master/build/fbcode_builder/CMake/FindSodium.cmake)
file from the Facebook Fizz project in order to detect and link the library.

`sodium_init()` initializes the library and should be called before any other
function provided by Sodium. It is safe to call this function more
than once and from different threads -- subsequent calls won't have any effects.

After this function returns, all of the other functions provided by Sodium will
be thread-safe.

`sodium_init()` doesn't perform any memory allocations. However, on Unix
systems, it may open `/dev/urandom` and keep the descriptor open, so that the
device remains accessible after a `chroot()` call.

Multiple calls to `sodium_init()` do not cause additional descriptors to be
opened.

`sodium_init()` returns `0` on success, `-1` on failure, and `1` if the library
had already been initialized.

Before returning, the function ensures that the system's random number generator
has been properly seeded.

## sodium_init() stalling on Linux

On some Linux systems, this may take some time, especially when called right
after a reboot of the system. That issue has been reported on Digital Ocean
virtual machines as well as on Scaleway ARM instances.

This can be confirmed with the following command:

```sh
cat /proc/sys/kernel/random/entropy_avail
```

If the command returns `0` or a very low number \(&lt; `160`\), and you are not
running an obsolete kernel, this is very likely to be the case.

In a virtualized environment, make sure that the `virtio-rng` interface is
available. If this is a cloud service and the hypervisor settings are out of
your reach, consider switching to a different service.

On a bare-metal host such as Scaleway instances, a possible workaround is to
install the `rng-tools` package:

```sh
apt-get install rng-tools
```

And check the value of `/proc/sys/kernel/random/entropy_avail` again. If the
value didn't go any higher, install `haveged`:

```sh
apt-get install haveged
```

Haveged should only be used as a very last resort. It hasn't received any
updates for 10+ years, and shouldn't be trusted as a single entropy source,
especially on virtualized environments.

[Jitterentropy](https://github.com/smuellerDD/jitterentropy-rngd) is a better
alternative, but most Linux distributions don't offer it as an installable
package yet.

Applications can warn users about the Linux RNG not being seeded before calling
`sodium_init()` using code similar to the following:

```c
#if defined(__linux__)
# include <fcntl.h>
# include <unistd.h>
# include <sys/ioctl.h>
# include <linux/random.h>
#endif
// ...
#if defined(__linux__) && defined(RNDGETENTCNT)
int fd;
int c;

if ((fd = open("/dev/random", O_RDONLY)) != -1) {
    if (ioctl(fd, RNDGETENTCNT, &c) == 0 && c < 160) {
        fputs("This system doesn't provide enough entropy to quickly generate high-quality random numbers.\n"
              "Installing the rng-utils/rng-tools, jitterentropy or haveged packages may help.\n"
              "On virtualized Linux environments, also consider using virtio-rng.\n"
              "The service will not start until enough entropy has been collected.\n", stderr);
    }
    (void) close(fd);
}
#endif
```

Congrats, you're all set up!

A good documentation page to read next might be
[Quickstart and FAQ](../quickstart/README.md).

Commit message:

AWS Nitro Enclave hangs resolution
Based on AWS team comments any my own (1st solution) experience.

See: https://github.com/aws/aws-nitro-enclaves-sdk-c/issues/41

usage/README.md, after:

# Usage

```c
#include <sodium.h>

int main(void)
{
    if (sodium_init() == -1) {
        return 1;
    }
    ...
}
```

`sodium.h` is the only header that has to be included.

The library is called `sodium` \(use `-lsodium` to link it\), and proper
compilation/linker flags can be obtained using `pkg-config` on systems where it
is available:

```bash
CFLAGS=$(pkg-config --cflags libsodium)
LDFLAGS=$(pkg-config --libs libsodium)
```

For static linking, Visual Studio users should define `SODIUM_STATIC=1` and
`SODIUM_EXPORT=`. This is not required on other platforms.

Projects using CMake can include the
[Findsodium.cmake](https://github.com/facebookincubator/fizz/blob/master/build/fbcode_builder/CMake/FindSodium.cmake)
file from the Facebook Fizz project in order to detect and link the library.

`sodium_init()` initializes the library and should be called before any other
function provided by Sodium. It is safe to call this function more
than once and from different threads -- subsequent calls won't have any effects.

After this function returns, all of the other functions provided by Sodium will
be thread-safe.

`sodium_init()` doesn't perform any memory allocations. However, on Unix
systems, it may open `/dev/urandom` and keep the descriptor open, so that the
device remains accessible after a `chroot()` call.

Multiple calls to `sodium_init()` do not cause additional descriptors to be
opened.

`sodium_init()` returns `0` on success, `-1` on failure, and `1` if the library
had already been initialized.

Before returning, the function ensures that the system's random number generator
has been properly seeded.

## sodium_init() stalling on Linux

On some Linux systems, this may take some time, especially when called right
after a reboot of the system. That issue has been reported on Digital Ocean
virtual machines as well as on Scaleway ARM instances, AWS Nitro Enclaves.

This can be confirmed with the following command:

```sh
cat /proc/sys/kernel/random/entropy_avail
```

If the command returns `0` or a very low number \(&lt; `160`\), and you are not
running an obsolete kernel, this is very likely to be the case.

In a virtualized environment, make sure that the `virtio-rng` interface is
available. If this is a cloud service and the hypervisor settings are out of
your reach, consider switching to a different service.

On a bare-metal host such as Scaleway instances, a possible workaround is to
install the `rng-tools` package:

```sh
apt-get install rng-tools
```

And check the value of `/proc/sys/kernel/random/entropy_avail` again. If the
value didn't go any higher, install `haveged`:

```sh
apt-get install haveged
```

Haveged should only be used as a very last resort. It hasn't received any
updates for 10+ years, and shouldn't be trusted as a single entropy source,
especially on virtualized environments.

[Jitterentropy](https://github.com/smuellerDD/jitterentropy-rngd) is a better
alternative, but most Linux distributions don't offer it as an installable
package yet.

For AWS Nitro Enclave there are a few possible solutions:

* Call `aws_nitro_enclaves_library_seed_entropy()` explicitly during application start, and on a timer afterwards.
* Use `RDSEED` CPU instruction to seed entropy, rngd or similar can help with this.
* Set `random.trust_cpu=on` in the kernel commandline (only works on Linux kernels > 4.19).

Applications can warn users about the Linux RNG not being seeded before calling
`sodium_init()` using code similar to the following:

```c
#if defined(__linux__)
# include <fcntl.h>
# include <unistd.h>
# include <sys/ioctl.h>
# include <linux/random.h>
#endif
// ...
#if defined(__linux__) && defined(RNDGETENTCNT)
int fd;
int c;

if ((fd = open("/dev/random", O_RDONLY)) != -1) {
    if (ioctl(fd, RNDGETENTCNT, &c) == 0 && c < 160) {
        fputs("This system doesn't provide enough entropy to quickly generate high-quality random numbers.\n"
              "Installing the rng-utils/rng-tools, jitterentropy or haveged packages may help.\n"
              "On virtualized Linux environments, also consider using virtio-rng.\n"
              "The service will not start until enough entropy has been collected.\n", stderr);
    }
    (void) close(fd);
}
#endif
```

Congrats, you're all set up!

A good documentation page to read next might be
[Quickstart and FAQ](../quickstart/README.md).
