installation/README.md, before:

# Installation

## Compilation on Unix-like systems

Sodium is a shared library with a machine-independent set of headers, so that it
can easily be used by 3rd party projects.

The library is built using autotools, making it easy to package.

Installation is trivial, and both compilation and testing can take advantage of
multiple CPU cores.

Download a
[tarball of libsodium](https://download.libsodium.org/libsodium/releases/),
preferably the latest `stable` version, then follow the ritual:

```sh
./configure
make && make check
sudo make install
```

Since different files are compiled for different CPU classes, and to prevent
unwanted optimizations, link-time optimization (LTO) should not be used.

Also do not enable sanitizers (such as `-fsanitize=signed-integer-overflow`).
These can introduce side channels.

On Linux, if the process hangs at the `make check` step, your system PRG may not
have been properly seeded. Please refer to the notes in the "Usage" section for
ways to address this.

Also on Linux, like any manually installed library, running the `ldconfig`
command is required in order to make the dynamic linker aware of the new library.

## Compilation on Windows

Compilation on Windows is usually not required, as pre-built libraries for MinGW
and Visual Studio are available \(see below\).

However, if you want to compile it yourself, start by cloning the
[stable branch](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/archive/stable.zip) from
the Git repository.

Visual Studio solutions can be then found in the `builds/msvc` directory.

In order to compile with MingW, run either `./dist-build/msys2-win32.sh` or
`./dist-build/msys2-win64.sh` for Win32 or x64 targets.

Alternatively, you can build and install libsodium using [vcpkg](https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg/) dependency manager:

```batch
git clone https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg.git
cd vcpkg
./bootstrap-vcpkg.bat
./vcpkg integrate install
./vcpkg install libsodium
```

The libsodium port in vcpkg is kept up to date by microsoft team members and community contributors.
If the version is out of date, please [create an issue or pull request](https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg) on the vcpkg repository.

## Pre-built libraries

[Pre-built x86 and x86_64 libraries for Visual Studio 2017 and 2019](https://download.libsodium.org/libsodium/releases/)
with `stable` additions (see below) are available, as well as pre-built libraries for MinGW32 and MinGW64.

They include header files, as well as static \(`.LIB`\) and shared \(`.DLL`\)
libraries for all the supported compiler versions.

### Note for Visual Studio

Projects willing to statically link Sodium must define a macro named
`SODIUM_STATIC`. This will prevent symbol definitions from being referenced with
`__dllexport`.

## Cross-compiling

The library can be cross-compiled. This is an example of cross-compiling to
ARM using the GNU tools for ARM embedded processors:

```sh
export PATH=/path/to/gcc-arm-none-eabi/bin:$PATH
export LDFLAGS='--specs=nosys.specs'
export CFLAGS='-Os'
./configure --host=arm-none-eabi --prefix=/install/path
make install
```

`make check` can also build the test apps, but these have to be run on the
native platform.

Note: `--specs=nosys.specs` is only required for the ARM compilation toolchain.

Please note that using libsodium on ARM Cortex M0, M3 and M4 CPUs is untested and not recommended if side-channels are a concern.

## Compiling with CompCert

Releases can be compiled using the CompCert compiler.

A typical command-line to compile Sodium on a little endian system with CompCert
is:

```sh
$ env CC=ccomp CFLAGS="-O2 -fstruct-passing -Usize_t" ./configure && \
make check && sudo make install
```

## Stable branch

We recommend using distribution tarballs over cloning the
[libsodium git repository](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium), especially
since tarballs do not require dependencies such as libtool and autotools.

However, if cloning a git repository happens to be more convenient, the
[stable](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/tree/stable) branch always
contains the latest stable release of libsodium, plus minor patches that will be
part of the next version, as well as critical security fixes while new packages
including them are being prepared.

Code in the `stable` branch also includes generated files, and does not require
the autotools (libtool, autoconf, automake) to be present.

To check out the stable branch, use:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium --branch stable
```

Tarballs of the `stable` code are also available for download, and are
recommended if you are compiling libsodium from source.

## Getting started

See the [quickstart](../quickstart/README.md) and [usage](../usage/README.md)
sections to get started!

## Integrity checking

Distribution files can be verified with
[Minisign](https://jedisct1.github.io/minisign/) and the following Ed25519 key:

`RWQf6LRCGA9i53mlYecO4IzT51TGPpvWucNSCh1CBM0QTaLn73Y7GFO3`

The `.minisig` file should be present in the same directory as the main file. The typical command to verify a file is:

```sh
minisign -P RWQf6LRCGA9i53mlYecO4IzT51TGPpvWucNSCh1CBM0QTaLn73Y7GFO3 -m <file>
```

Or with GnuPG and the following RSA key:

```text
-----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
Version: GnuPG v1 (OpenBSD)
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 =Hkmu
-----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
```

## Reporting vulnerabilities

We encourage users and researchers to use PGP-encrypted emails to transmit
confidential details regarding possible vulnerabilities in the Sodium library.

Details should be sent to: j \[at\] pureftpd \[dot\] org using the PGP key
above.

Commit message:

Add installation from package repos to installation instructions
Currently, the only instructions for installation on Linux are to
compile from scratch, but many distributions have packages in their
repositories which provide libsodium, allowing installation/updates to
be managed by the system package manager. This commit points users
towards their distro's package repository, which could be more
convenient for many users.

installation/README.md, after:

# Installation

## Linux

Many Linux distributions include packages which provide Sodium, allowing its
installation and updating to be handled by the package manager. For example, the
`libsodium-dev` package provides the library on Debian, and can be installed in
the standard way:

```sh
sudo apt install libsodium-dev
```

If your distribution does not provide a sufficiently recent version of Sodium,
or you would prefer to compile the library yourself, you can follow the
instructions for compilation on Unix-like systems.

## Compilation on Unix-like systems

Sodium is a shared library with a machine-independent set of headers, so that it
can easily be used by 3rd party projects.

The library is built using autotools, making it easy to package.

Installation is trivial, and both compilation and testing can take advantage of
multiple CPU cores.

Download a
[tarball of libsodium](https://download.libsodium.org/libsodium/releases/),
preferably the latest `stable` version, then follow the ritual:

```sh
./configure
make && make check
sudo make install
```

Since different files are compiled for different CPU classes, and to prevent
unwanted optimizations, link-time optimization (LTO) should not be used.

Also do not enable sanitizers (such as `-fsanitize=signed-integer-overflow`).
These can introduce side channels.

On Linux, if the process hangs at the `make check` step, your system PRG may not
have been properly seeded. Please refer to the notes in the "Usage" section for
ways to address this.

Also on Linux, like any manually installed library, running the `ldconfig`
command is required in order to make the dynamic linker aware of the new library.

## Compilation on Windows

Compilation on Windows is usually not required, as pre-built libraries for MinGW
and Visual Studio are available \(see below\).

However, if you want to compile it yourself, start by cloning the
[stable branch](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/archive/stable.zip) from
the Git repository.

Visual Studio solutions can be then found in the `builds/msvc` directory.

In order to compile with MingW, run either `./dist-build/msys2-win32.sh` or
`./dist-build/msys2-win64.sh` for Win32 or x64 targets.

Alternatively, you can build and install libsodium using [vcpkg](https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg/) dependency manager:

```batch
git clone https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg.git
cd vcpkg
./bootstrap-vcpkg.bat
./vcpkg integrate install
./vcpkg install libsodium
```

The libsodium port in vcpkg is kept up to date by microsoft team members and community contributors.
If the version is out of date, please [create an issue or pull request](https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg) on the vcpkg repository.

## Pre-built libraries

[Pre-built x86 and x86_64 libraries for Visual Studio 2017 and 2019](https://download.libsodium.org/libsodium/releases/)
with `stable` additions (see below) are available, as well as pre-built libraries for MinGW32 and MinGW64.

They include header files, as well as static \(`.LIB`\) and shared \(`.DLL`\)
libraries for all the supported compiler versions.

### Note for Visual Studio

Projects willing to statically link Sodium must define a macro named
`SODIUM_STATIC`. This will prevent symbol definitions from being referenced with
`__dllexport`.

## Cross-compiling

The library can be cross-compiled. This is an example of cross-compiling to
ARM using the GNU tools for ARM embedded processors:

```sh
export PATH=/path/to/gcc-arm-none-eabi/bin:$PATH
export LDFLAGS='--specs=nosys.specs'
export CFLAGS='-Os'
./configure --host=arm-none-eabi --prefix=/install/path
make install
```

`make check` can also build the test apps, but these have to be run on the
native platform.

Note: `--specs=nosys.specs` is only required for the ARM compilation toolchain.

Please note that using libsodium on ARM Cortex M0, M3 and M4 CPUs is untested and not recommended if side-channels are a concern.

## Compiling with CompCert

Releases can be compiled using the CompCert compiler.

A typical command-line to compile Sodium on a little endian system with CompCert
is:

```sh
$ env CC=ccomp CFLAGS="-O2 -fstruct-passing -Usize_t" ./configure && \
make check && sudo make install
```

## Stable branch

We recommend using distribution tarballs over cloning the
[libsodium git repository](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium), especially
since tarballs do not require dependencies such as libtool and autotools.

However, if cloning a git repository happens to be more convenient, the
[stable](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/tree/stable) branch always
contains the latest stable release of libsodium, plus minor patches that will be
part of the next version, as well as critical security fixes while new packages
including them are being prepared.

Code in the `stable` branch also includes generated files, and does not require
the autotools (libtool, autoconf, automake) to be present.

To check out the stable branch, use:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium --branch stable
```

Tarballs of the `stable` code are also available for download, and are
recommended if you are compiling libsodium from source.

## Getting started

See the [quickstart](../quickstart/README.md) and [usage](../usage/README.md)
sections to get started!

## Integrity checking

Distribution files can be verified with
[Minisign](https://jedisct1.github.io/minisign/) and the following Ed25519 key:

`RWQf6LRCGA9i53mlYecO4IzT51TGPpvWucNSCh1CBM0QTaLn73Y7GFO3`

The `.minisig` file should be present in the same directory as the main file. The typical command to verify a file is:

```sh
minisign -P RWQf6LRCGA9i53mlYecO4IzT51TGPpvWucNSCh1CBM0QTaLn73Y7GFO3 -m <file>
```

Or with GnuPG and the following RSA key:

```text
-----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
Version: GnuPG v1 (OpenBSD)
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 =Hkmu
-----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
```

## Reporting vulnerabilities

We encourage users and researchers to use PGP-encrypted emails to transmit
confidential details regarding possible vulnerabilities in the Sodium library.

Details should be sent to: j \[at\] pureftpd \[dot\] org using the PGP key
above.
