quickstart/README.md, before:

# Quickstart / Libsodium FAQ

## Boilerplate

A project using libsodium should include the `sodium.h` header. Including
individual headers is neither required nor recommended.

The `sodium_init()` function must then be called before any other function. It
is safe to call `sodium_init()` multiple times, or from different threads; it
will immediately return `1` without doing anything if the library had already
been initialized.

```c
#include <sodium.h>

int main(void)
{
    if (sodium_init() < 0) {
        /* panic! the library couldn't be initialized, it is not safe to use */
    }
    return 0;
}
```

## Is libsodium cross-platform?

Yes. A message can be encrypted in Python on a MIPS CPU, decrypted in Javascript
using Chrome on Windows, and its signature can then be verified by an iPhone app
written in Swift.

The available algorithms are the same on all supported platforms. Input and
output formats are also identical on all platforms. And bindings for various
programming languages tend to leverage the original algorithms and formats.

## How do I generate random numbers that are safe to use for cryptography?

Use the [`randombytes` API](../generating_random_data/README.md).

## How do I compute a hash?

Use the [`crypto_generichash` API](../hashing/generic_hashing.md).

## What is the difference between a secret key and a password?

A password has a couple requirements to fulfill:

* It has to be reasonably short
* It must be easy to type on any keyboard
* Users may have to remember it

As a result, the number of possible passwords of a given size is fairly small.
For the same size, the number of distinct passwords actually used is even way
smaller, and their distribution is skewed. Even if mitigations exist, guessing
(brute-forcing) a password is often practical.

A secret key, on the other hand, is a sequence of bits that can be of any size,
doesn't have any restrictions, and is generated by software or specialized
hardware. A 32 bytes key represents 256 bits, none of them being predicable by
observing other bits from that key or from previous keys.

Secret keys are not designed to be typed on a keyboard. This is binary data.
They are stored as files, kept in secure memory or sent over the network. They
can be unique, and offer far more security than passwords.

Libsodium almost exclusively uses secret keys.

If an application really needs to use a password as a secret key, it should call
the `crypto_pwhash()` function first. This computes a secret key from a
password, using an intentionally CPU-intensive and memory-hard function (to slow
down brute-force attacks).

But native secret keys using the `*_keygen()` function should always be
prefered.

## How do I initialize the library from another library?

If the other library doesn't have any initialization function, it can use a [`DllMain()`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/dlls/dllmain) function (Windows), or `__attribute__((constructor))` (gcc, clang, icc on MacOS and ELF-based systems) to call `sodium_init()` on load.

However, explicitly calling initialization functions are recommended; automatic initialization makes it difficult to safely recover from errors.

## How to check if a function call succeeded?

Functions returning an `int` return `0` on success and `-1` to indicate an error.

Functions returning a pointer return a valid address on success and `NULL` on error.

Some operations include variants with slightly different algorithms. For example, authenticated encryption can be done with XChaCha20-Poly1305 or AES-GCM. For consistency and to make high-level wrappers using dynamic dispatch easier to implement, all the variants of a function share the same prototype.

In the above example, AES-GCM can fail due to message size limits, but XChaCha20 cannot; its limits are only theoretical, so checking the return value for that particular variant would not be strictly necessary. We still recommend doing it unconditionally in applications: it is cheap, is good hygiene, and functions can easily be replaced later if necessary.

## How do I encrypt data?

### One-shot encryption, where everything fits in memory

* Create a secret key using `crypto_secretbox_keygen()`
* Create a nonce using `randombytes_buf(nonce, sizeof nonce)`
* Use `crypto_secretbox_easy()` to encrypt the message, and send/store the resulting
  ciphertext along with the nonce. Unlike the key, the nonce doesn't have to be
  secret.
* Use `crypto_secretbox_open_easy()` to decrypt the ciphertext using the same key and
  nonce.

### If everything doesn't fit in memory, or is not available as a single chunk

* With libsodium 1.0.14 and beyond, use the
  [`crypto_secretstream` API](../secret-key_cryptography/secretstream.md).
* Otherwise, read the guide to
  [encrypting a set of messages](../secret-key_cryptography/encrypted-messages.md)

## How do I safely store and later verify a password?

* Use the `crypto_pwhash_str()` and `crypto_pwhash_str_verify()` functions,
  described in the
  [`password hashing guide`](../password_hashing/README.md).

## How do I encrypt a file using a password?

* Derive an encryption key from the password using
  [`crypto_pwhash()`](../password_hashing/default_phf.md).
* Use that key with the
  [`crypto_secretstream` API](../secret-key_cryptography/secretstream.md).
* File metadata should probably be part of the encrypted data, or, if it is not
  secret, included as additional data.

## How can `A` and `B` securely communicate without a pre-shared secret key?

Use the [key exchange API](../key_exchange/README.md):

* `A` and `B` both call `crypto_kx_keypair()` to create their own key pair.
  Secret keys have to remain secret, but `A` can send its public key to `B` or
  even make it available to everyone. The same applies to `B`'s public key.
* `A` uses `crypto_kx_client_session_keys()` along with `B`'s public key and its
  key pair to create a set of shared keys to communicate with `B`.
* `B` uses `crypto_kx_server_session_keys()` along with `A`'s public key and its
  key pair to create a set of shared keys to communicate with `A`.

The shared keys computed by `A` and `B` will be identical. There are two of
them. One can be used to encrypt and decrypt message in one direction (from `A`
to `B`) and the other one to encrypt and decrypt messages in the other direction
(from `B` to `A`).

To actually encrypt and decrypt data using one of these shared secret keys, use
one of `crypto_secretbox_*()`, `crypto_secretstream_*()` or `crypto_aead_*()`.

## How can I derive multiple keys from a single master key? Like what HKDF does?

Use the [key derivation API](../key_derivation/README.md).

## Do I need to add a signature to encrypted messages to detect if they have been tampered with?

No. Signatures are designed to allow non-secret data to be verified by many
parties, using a public key. For examples, a signature can be used to verify the
authenticity of a firmware update.

When `A` encrypts a message for `B` using a shared secret key using
`crypto_box()`, `crypto_secretbox()`, `crypto_seal()`, `crypto_secretstream()`
or `crypto_aead()`, an authentication tag is also computed, and should be sent
to `B` along with the encrypted payload.

During the decryption process, the secret key is used to check that the
authentication tag is valid for the given encrypted message. If that message has
been modified, the tag will not be valid, and decryption functions will return
an error code. Knowing the secret key is required in order to create a valid
tag, therefore only `A` and `B` can create such a tag.

And if shared keys are computed using the key exchange API (`crypto_kx`),
a valid tag for a message can only be created by the sender.

## How can I sign and encrypt using the same key pair?

First, read the previous section. In most cases, signing a message in addition to encrypting it is not required.

If you really need to sign and encrypt a message, possibly for signatures to be publicly verified, consider using [signcryption](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-signcryption).

Alternatively, signing key pairs can be [converted to X25519 key exchange key pairs](../advanced/ed25519-curve25519.md). This can be used to encrypt and sign independently.

However, this is not recommended and usually not necessary. Prefer using distinct key pairs instead.

Remember that public keys for both operations are very small: 32 bytes only. Concatenating both produces an aggregate public key that is only 64 bytes long. For most applications, the overhead is negligible, and conversions are not required any longer.

On the sender side, `crypto_sign_seed_keypair()` and `crypto_kx_seed_keypair()` can derive specialized key pairs from the same 32 byte seed.

If you really want to use a unique key pair for both operations, Diffie-Hellman key exchange can be made over edwards25519, the same group as the one used for signatures. Libsodium provides the `crypto_scalarmult_ed25519()` and `crypto_scalarmult_ed25519_base()` functions for scalar multiplicaton over edwards25519.

Finally, if, for some reason, you want to implement your own signcryption scheme:

* If public verifiability is not required, sign `(encryption_key || message)` first, then encrypt `(recipient_id || signature || message)`.
* If public verifiability is required, encrypt `(sender_id || message)`, then sign the ciphertext.
* If public verifiability is required, and the same message can be decrypted by multiple recipients, encrypt `(H(sender_id || message) || message)` (if using AES-GCM or Salsa/ChaCha-Poly1305), then sign the ciphertext.

where `sender_id` and `recipient_id` is public data that uniquely identifies a party.

Verify the metadata when opening a signed+encrypted message.

## How do I hide the length of a message?

Use [padding](../helpers/padding.md).

## Shall I call `crypto_generichash_blake2b` or just `crypto_generichash`?

Always use the high-level API if one is available. The low-level API it is based
on is guaranteed not to change before a major revision of the library. And if a
high-level API needs to use a different construction, it will expose a different
set of functions.

This is true for all APIs provided by the library.

## Why is `crypto_stream()` barely documented and not even present in some bindings?

The `crypto_stream()` API generates a deterministic sequence of bytes from a
seed, and optionally applies the XOR operation between that sequence and some
input sequence.

Performing the XOR operation once produces content that resembles random data,
and performing the same operation twice restores the initial input sequence.

This can be seen as a form of encryption. However:

* If an adversary replaces the ciphertext with nul bytes, what will be decrypted
  is the original, complete sequence derived from the seed. This can have
  catastrophic implications with some (badly designed) protocols.
* More generally, anyone can modify the ciphertext without this being detected.
  Since a stream cipher is XOR'd with a message, targeted bits can be flipped.
  Knowing the secret key is not required.

If a deterministic sequence has to be derived from a seed, for example for unit
testing, libsodium provides the `randombytes_buf_deterministic()` function.

For actual encryption, other options such as `crypto_secretbox`, `crypto_aead`
and `crypto_secretstream` must generally be used over `crypto_stream`, as they
will add and verify an authentication tag to detect data that has been corrupted
or tampered with.

`crypto_stream()` is only useful as a building block to design custom
constructions. As-is, it is completely insecure.

## Is encryption without nonces possible?

The encryption schemes implemented in libsodium are fast, but require a unique `(key, nonce)` tuple for every message.

Nonces don't have to be secret, but they must not be reused. Reusing a nonce would destroy the confidentiality of messages sharing the same nonce, and allow an attacker to craft additional valid ciphertexts.

On a platform where counters cannot be maintained, and where no trusted source of randomness exist, deterministic encryption can be used as a last resort.

[XChaCha20-SIV](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-xchacha20-siv) is such a construction, that can also be used for key wrapping.

On such systems, [libhydrogen](https://libhydrogen.org) may also be a better option.

## I want to write bindings for my favorite language, where should I start?

Start with the `crypto_generichash` and with the `crypto_secretstream` APIs.
These are the trickiest to implement bindings for, and will provide good
insights about how to design your bindings.

Commit message:

Add a blurb about warn_unused_result attributes

quickstart/README.md, after:

# Quickstart / Libsodium FAQ

## Boilerplate

A project using libsodium should include the `sodium.h` header. Including
individual headers is neither required nor recommended.

The `sodium_init()` function must then be called before any other function. It
is safe to call `sodium_init()` multiple times, or from different threads; it
will immediately return `1` without doing anything if the library had already
been initialized.

```c
#include <sodium.h>

int main(void)
{
    if (sodium_init() < 0) {
        /* panic! the library couldn't be initialized, it is not safe to use */
    }
    return 0;
}
```

## Is libsodium cross-platform?

Yes. A message can be encrypted in Python on a MIPS CPU, decrypted in Javascript
using Chrome on Windows, and its signature can then be verified by an iPhone app
written in Swift.

The available algorithms are the same on all supported platforms. Input and
output formats are also identical on all platforms. And bindings for various
programming languages tend to leverage the original algorithms and formats.

## How do I generate random numbers that are safe to use for cryptography?

Use the [`randombytes` API](../generating_random_data/README.md).

## How do I compute a hash?

Use the [`crypto_generichash` API](../hashing/generic_hashing.md).

## What is the difference between a secret key and a password?

A password has a couple requirements to fulfill:

* It has to be reasonably short
* It must be easy to type on any keyboard
* Users may have to remember it

As a result, the number of possible passwords of a given size is fairly small.
For the same size, the number of distinct passwords actually used is even way
smaller, and their distribution is skewed. Even if mitigations exist, guessing
(brute-forcing) a password is often practical.

A secret key, on the other hand, is a sequence of bits that can be of any size,
doesn't have any restrictions, and is generated by software or specialized
hardware. A 32 bytes key represents 256 bits, none of them being predicable by
observing other bits from that key or from previous keys.

Secret keys are not designed to be typed on a keyboard. This is binary data.
They are stored as files, kept in secure memory or sent over the network. They
can be unique, and offer far more security than passwords.

Libsodium almost exclusively uses secret keys.

If an application really needs to use a password as a secret key, it should call
the `crypto_pwhash()` function first. This computes a secret key from a
password, using an intentionally CPU-intensive and memory-hard function (to slow
down brute-force attacks).

But native secret keys using the `*_keygen()` function should always be
prefered.

## How do I initialize the library from another library?

If the other library doesn't have any initialization function, it can use a [`DllMain()`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/dlls/dllmain) function (Windows), or `__attribute__((constructor))` (gcc, clang, icc on MacOS and ELF-based systems) to call `sodium_init()` on load.

However, explicitly calling initialization functions are recommended; automatic initialization makes it difficult to safely recover from errors.

## How to check if a function call succeeded?

Functions returning an `int` return `0` on success and `-1` to indicate an error.

Functions returning a pointer return a valid address on success and `NULL` on error.

Some operations include variants with slightly different algorithms. For example, authenticated encryption can be done with XChaCha20-Poly1305 or AES-GCM. For consistency and to make high-level wrappers using dynamic dispatch easier to implement, all the variants of a function share the same prototype.

In the above example, AES-GCM can fail due to message size limits, but XChaCha20 cannot; its limits are only theoretical, so checking the return value for that particular variant would not be strictly necessary. We still recommend doing it unconditionally in applications: it is cheap, is good hygiene, and functions can easily be replaced later if necessary.

Some returned values are critical to be checked. For example, the outcome of the verification of an authentication token. These functions are tagged with the `warn_unused_result` attribute, and will cause a compiler warning if ignored. Such warnings should not be ignored.

## How do I encrypt data?

### One-shot encryption, where everything fits in memory

* Create a secret key using `crypto_secretbox_keygen()`
* Create a nonce using `randombytes_buf(nonce, sizeof nonce)`
* Use `crypto_secretbox_easy()` to encrypt the message, and send/store the resulting
  ciphertext along with the nonce. Unlike the key, the nonce doesn't have to be
  secret.
* Use `crypto_secretbox_open_easy()` to decrypt the ciphertext using the same key and
  nonce.

### If everything doesn't fit in memory, or is not available as a single chunk

* With libsodium 1.0.14 and beyond, use the
  [`crypto_secretstream` API](../secret-key_cryptography/secretstream.md).
* Otherwise, read the guide to
  [encrypting a set of messages](../secret-key_cryptography/encrypted-messages.md)

## How do I safely store and later verify a password?

* Use the `crypto_pwhash_str()` and `crypto_pwhash_str_verify()` functions,
  described in the
  [`password hashing guide`](../password_hashing/README.md).

## How do I encrypt a file using a password?

* Derive an encryption key from the password using
  [`crypto_pwhash()`](../password_hashing/default_phf.md).
* Use that key with the
  [`crypto_secretstream` API](../secret-key_cryptography/secretstream.md).
* File metadata should probably be part of the encrypted data, or, if it is not
  secret, included as additional data.

## How can `A` and `B` securely communicate without a pre-shared secret key?

Use the [key exchange API](../key_exchange/README.md):

* `A` and `B` both call `crypto_kx_keypair()` to create their own key pair.
  Secret keys have to remain secret, but `A` can send its public key to `B` or
  even make it available to everyone. The same applies to `B`'s public key.
* `A` uses `crypto_kx_client_session_keys()` along with `B`'s public key and its
  key pair to create a set of shared keys to communicate with `B`.
* `B` uses `crypto_kx_server_session_keys()` along with `A`'s public key and its
  key pair to create a set of shared keys to communicate with `A`.

The shared keys computed by `A` and `B` will be identical. There are two of
them. One can be used to encrypt and decrypt message in one direction (from `A`
to `B`) and the other one to encrypt and decrypt messages in the other direction
(from `B` to `A`).

To actually encrypt and decrypt data using one of these shared secret keys, use
one of `crypto_secretbox_*()`, `crypto_secretstream_*()` or `crypto_aead_*()`.

## How can I derive multiple keys from a single master key? Like what HKDF does?

Use the [key derivation API](../key_derivation/README.md).

## Do I need to add a signature to encrypted messages to detect if they have been tampered with?

No. Signatures are designed to allow non-secret data to be verified by many
parties, using a public key. For examples, a signature can be used to verify the
authenticity of a firmware update.

When `A` encrypts a message for `B` using a shared secret key using
`crypto_box()`, `crypto_secretbox()`, `crypto_seal()`, `crypto_secretstream()`
or `crypto_aead()`, an authentication tag is also computed, and should be sent
to `B` along with the encrypted payload.

During the decryption process, the secret key is used to check that the
authentication tag is valid for the given encrypted message. If that message has
been modified, the tag will not be valid, and decryption functions will return
an error code. Knowing the secret key is required in order to create a valid
tag, therefore only `A` and `B` can create such a tag.

And if shared keys are computed using the key exchange API (`crypto_kx`),
a valid tag for a message can only be created by the sender.

## How can I sign and encrypt using the same key pair?

First, read the previous section. In most cases, signing a message in addition to encrypting it is not required.

If you really need to sign and encrypt a message, possibly for signatures to be publicly verified, consider using [signcryption](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-signcryption).

Alternatively, signing key pairs can be [converted to X25519 key exchange key pairs](../advanced/ed25519-curve25519.md). This can be used to encrypt and sign independently.

However, this is not recommended and usually not necessary. Prefer using distinct key pairs instead.

Remember that public keys for both operations are very small: 32 bytes only. Concatenating both produces an aggregate public key that is only 64 bytes long. For most applications, the overhead is negligible, and conversions are not required any longer.

On the sender side, `crypto_sign_seed_keypair()` and `crypto_kx_seed_keypair()` can derive specialized key pairs from the same 32 byte seed.

If you really want to use a unique key pair for both operations, Diffie-Hellman key exchange can be made over edwards25519, the same group as the one used for signatures. Libsodium provides the `crypto_scalarmult_ed25519()` and `crypto_scalarmult_ed25519_base()` functions for scalar multiplicaton over edwards25519.

Finally, if, for some reason, you want to implement your own signcryption scheme:

* If public verifiability is not required, sign `(encryption_key || message)` first, then encrypt `(recipient_id || signature || message)`.
* If public verifiability is required, encrypt `(sender_id || message)`, then sign the ciphertext.
* If public verifiability is required, and the same message can be decrypted by multiple recipients, encrypt `(H(sender_id || message) || message)` (if using AES-GCM or Salsa/ChaCha-Poly1305), then sign the ciphertext.

where `sender_id` and `recipient_id` is public data that uniquely identifies a party.

Verify the metadata when opening a signed+encrypted message.

## How do I hide the length of a message?

Use [padding](../helpers/padding.md).

## Shall I call `crypto_generichash_blake2b` or just `crypto_generichash`?

Always use the high-level API if one is available. The low-level API it is based
on is guaranteed not to change before a major revision of the library. And if a
high-level API needs to use a different construction, it will expose a different
set of functions.

This is true for all APIs provided by the library.

## Why is `crypto_stream()` barely documented and not even present in some bindings?

The `crypto_stream()` API generates a deterministic sequence of bytes from a
seed, and optionally applies the XOR operation between that sequence and some
input sequence.

Performing the XOR operation once produces content that resembles random data,
and performing the same operation twice restores the initial input sequence.

This can be seen as a form of encryption. However:

* If an adversary replaces the ciphertext with nul bytes, what will be decrypted
  is the original, complete sequence derived from the seed. This can have
  catastrophic implications with some (badly designed) protocols.
* More generally, anyone can modify the ciphertext without this being detected.
  Since a stream cipher is XOR'd with a message, targeted bits can be flipped.
  Knowing the secret key is not required.

If a deterministic sequence has to be derived from a seed, for example for unit
testing, libsodium provides the `randombytes_buf_deterministic()` function.

For actual encryption, other options such as `crypto_secretbox`, `crypto_aead`
and `crypto_secretstream` must generally be used over `crypto_stream`, as they
will add and verify an authentication tag to detect data that has been corrupted
or tampered with.

`crypto_stream()` is only useful as a building block to design custom
constructions. As-is, it is completely insecure.

## Is encryption without nonces possible?

The encryption schemes implemented in libsodium are fast, but require a unique `(key, nonce)` tuple for every message.

Nonces don't have to be secret, but they must not be reused. Reusing a nonce would destroy the confidentiality of messages sharing the same nonce, and allow an attacker to craft additional valid ciphertexts.

On a platform where counters cannot be maintained, and where no trusted source of randomness exist, deterministic encryption can be used as a last resort.

[XChaCha20-SIV](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-xchacha20-siv) is such a construction, that can also be used for key wrapping.

On such systems, [libhydrogen](https://libhydrogen.org) may also be a better option.

## I want to write bindings for my favorite language, where should I start?

Start with the `crypto_generichash` and with the `crypto_secretstream` APIs.
These are the trickiest to implement bindings for, and will provide good
insights about how to design your bindings.
