libsodium_users/README.md, before:

# Applications using libsodium
Some applications using Libsodium. Send a [pull request](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-doc/blob/master/libsodium_users/README.md) to add yours to that list.

- [CRUD Messenger](https://github.com/zyisrad/crudMessenger): A libsodium-php and MongoDB based single server messaging platform.
- [CurveLock](https://github.com/adamcaudill/CurveLock): Message encryption for Windows.
- [Cyph](https://cyph.im/): End-to-end encrypted, authenticated, and ephemeral chat with voice + video + file transfers.
- [Discord](https://discordapp.com): All-in-one voice and text chat for gamers that’s free, secure, and works on both your desktop and phone.
- [Evernym Plenum](http://evernym.com/): A byzantine fault tolerant protocol.
- [Fastd](http://fastd.readthedocs.org): A fast and secure tunnelling daemon.
- [FeCl](https://github.com/jhwgh1968/FeCl): A secure message-passing server based on libsodium.
- [Flocksy](https://github.com/alex-dot/syncbox): An anonymous file synchronisation tool.
- [Glorytun](https://github.com/angt/glorytun): A small, simple and very fast VPN.
- [Habitat](https://www.habitat.sh/): Habitat, by Chef, is automation that travels with the app.
- [Hat-Backup](https://github.com/google/hat-backup): A backend-agnostic snapshotting backup system.
- [KadNode](https://github.com/mwarning/KadNode): A small P2P DNS resolution daemon based on a Distributed Hash Table.
- [Kickpass](https://github.com/paulfariello/kickpass): A stupid simple password manager.
- [Lawncipher](https://github.com/LockateMe/Lawncipher): An embedded, encrypted, multi-purpose document store.
- [Lageant](https://github.com/bitbeans/lageant): Libsodium Authentication Agent.
- [Libsodium password hashing schemes for Dovecot](https://github.com/LuckyFellow/dovecot-libsodium-plugin): Dovecot plugin to support Scrypt and Argon2 for password hashing.
- [Libsodium for Universal Windows Platform](https://github.com/charlesportwoodii/libsodium-uwp): a C++ Windows Runtime Component for UWP applications.
- [Lumimaja](https://github.com/Safari77/lumimaja): PasswordSafe with Argon2 KDF, data encrypted with ChaCha20Poly1305, and Yubikey support.
- [Magic Wormhole](https://github.com/warner/magic-wormhole): Get things from one computer to another, safely.
- [MaidSafe](http://maidsafe.net/): A new Secure way to access a world of existing apps where the security of your data is put above all else.
- [Minisign](https://jedisct1.github.io/minisign/): A dead simple tool to sign files and verify signatures.
- [MLVPN](http://zehome.github.io/MLVPN/): A multi-link VPN (ADSL/SDSL/xDSL/Network aggregator)
- [Molch](https://github.com/FSMaxB/molch): An implementation of the Axolotl ratchet.
- [NanoChat](https://github.com/hamidreza-s/NanoChat): A P2P, E2E encrypted and discoverable chat application on top of nanomsg library.
- [Netcode.io](http://netcode.io): A simple protocol for creating secure client/server connections over UDP, designed for games like agar.io that shunt players from a main website or web backend to a number of dedicated server instances, with each dedicated server having some maximum number of players.
- [NTPsec](https://github.com/ntpsec/ntpsec): A security-hardened implementation of Network Time Protocol Version 4.
- [Open Reputation](https://openreputation.net/): An open source decentralized platform that maps identity and reputation onto the Internet-of-things.
- [OpenBazaar](https://www.openbazaar.org/): A free market for all. No fees, no restrictions.
- [PAVE](https://pave.software/): The Password Manager. Easy password sharing for teams. No cloud.
- [PCP](https://github.com/TLINDEN/pcp): Pretty Curved Privacy (pcp1) is a commandline utility which can be used to encrypt files.
- [Pbox](https://github.com/zyisrad/pbox): A CLI password manager.
- [Petmail](https://github.com/warner/petmail): A secure communication and file-sharing system.
- [PipeSocks](https://github.com/pipesocks/pipesocks): A pipe-like SOCKS5 tunnel system.
- [PowerDNS](https://www.powerdns.com/): PowerDNS has been designed to serve both the needs of small installations by being easy to setup, as well as for serving very large query volumes on large numbers of domains. Additionally, PowerDNS offers very high domain resolution performance.
- [QtCrypt](https://github.com/trashctor/QtCrypt): Lightweight, portable application that encrypts files and directories using a symmetric-key algorithm.
- [Reop](http://www.tedunangst.com/flak/post/reop): Reasonable expectation of privacy.
- [Rubinius](http://rubinius.com/): Rubinius is a platform for building programming language technology.
- [SODA](https://github.com/vong-xiv/SODA): The SODA project aims to investigate the relationship between server components and server performance.
- [SaltStack](http://saltstack.com/): SaltStack software orchestrates the build and ongoing management of any modern infrastructure. 
- [Sandstorm](https://sandstorm.io/): An open source operating system for personal and private clouds.
- [ShadowSocks](https://shadowsocks.org/en/index.html): A secure socks5 proxy, designed to protect your Internet traffic.
- [Simple DnsCrypt](https://github.com/bitbeans/SimpleDnsCrypt): A simple management tool for dnscrypt-proxy.
- [Splonebox](https://splone.com/splonebox/): An open source network assessment tool with focus on modularity.
- [Stellar](https://www.stellar.org/): An open platform for building financial products that connect people everywhere.
- [Tbak](https://github.com/tux3/tbak): Encrypted, compressed, distributed backups.
- [Telehash](http://telehash.org/): An embeddable private network stack for mobile, web, and devices.
- [Tinfoil Chat NaCl](https://github.com/maqp/tfc-nacl): TFC-NaCl is a high assurance encryption plugin for the Pidgin IM client.
- [Tox](https://tox.chat/): A new kind of instant messenging.
- [TREES](https://0xacab.org/riseuplabs/trees): A Dovecot email storage encryption plugin.
- [Ultrapowa Clash Server](http://ultrapowa.com/ucs/): UCS is a server emulator for the famous game Clash of Clans
- [VOLTTRON](http://gridoptics.pnnl.gov/VOLTTRON/): VOLTTRON is an innovative distributed control and sensing software platform. Its source code has been released, making it possible for researchers and others to use this tool to build applications for more efficiently managing energy use among appliances and devices, including heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, lighting, electric vehicles and others.
- [VPNCloud](https://github.com/dswd/vpncloud.rs): A Peer-to-Peer VPN.
- [Wire](https://wire.com/): Modern, private communications. Crystal clear voice, video and group chats. No advertising. Your data, always encrypted.
- [Zcash](https://z.cash/): Zcash is a decentralized and open source cryptocurrency that aims to set a new standard for privacy through the use of groundbreaking cryptography.

# Libraries using libsodium
Some libraries and frameworks using Libsodium. Send a [pull request](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-doc/blob/master/libsodium_users/README.md) to add yours to that list.

- [Asio Sodium Socket](https://github.com/mikezackles/asio_sodium_socket): A header-only C++14 library implementing custom transport encryption using libsodium and Asio's stackless coroutines.
- [Blobcrypt](https://github.com/jedisct1/blobcrypt): Authenticated encryption for streams and arbitrary large files.
- [Cordova Minisodium](https://npmdaily.com/pkg/cordova-plugin-minisodium): A minimal sodium plugin for Cordova - for iOS and Android.
- [EdCert](https://docs.rs/edcert/): A Rust crate to sign and verify content using Ed25519.
- [Halite](https://github.com/paragonie/halite): High-level cryptography interface for PHP.
- [libsaxolotl](https://github.com/stef/libsaxolotl): An Axolotol implementation in C using libsodium.
- [neuropil](https://www.neuropil.org/): An IoT secure messaging library with end-to-end encryption written in C and using libsodium
- [Libsodium-Laravel](https://github.com/scrothers/libsodium-laravel): Laravel integration.
- [Libsodium-UE4](https://github.com/maxenko/libsodium-ue4): An easy to use cryptography plugin for Unreal Engine 4 based on libsodium.
- [LibSQRL](https://sqrlid.com/libsqrl/): SQRL authentication library.
- [libyojimbo](https://github.com/networkprotocol/libyojimbo): A library for creating secure client/server network protocols over UDP.
- [MEGA SDK](https://github.com/meganz/sdk): SDK by mega.nz, a secure cloud storage provider that protects your data, thanks to end-to-end encryption.
- [Macaroons](https://github.com/rescrv/libmacaroons): Macaroons are flexible authorization credentials that support decentralized delegation, attenuation, and verification.
- [minisign-net](https://github.com/bitbeans/minisign-net): .NET library to handle and create minisign signatures.
- [NaclKeys](https://github.com/bitbeans/NaclKeys): Library to generate libsodium-net compatible KeyPair`s.
- [OAuthSDK](https://github.com/ramki1979/OAuthSDK): OAuth 1 and OAuth 2 framework in Swift for iOS.
- [Posh-Sodium](https://github.com/jamessantiago/PoSH-Sodium): A powershell module.
- [Pull-box-stream](https://github.com/dominictarr/pull-box-stream): One way streaming encryption for Javascript.
- [Smart Encryption](https://github.com/adamcaudill/SmartEncryption): Secure by default encryption for .NET
- [Stream Cryptor](https://github.com/bitbeans/StreamCryptor): Stream encryption & decryption with libsodium and protobuf for .NET
- [The Update Framework](https://github.com/theupdateframework/tuf): A plug-and-play library for securing a software updater.
- [ZeroMQ](http://zeromq.org/): Connect your code in any language, on any platform.

# Companies using libsodium
Some companies using Libsodium, possibly in non-opensource products. Send a [pull request](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-doc/blob/master/libsodium_users/README.md) to add yours to that list.

- [Bearch Inc.](http://www.getbearch.com/)
- [Digital Ocean](https://www.digitalocean.com/)
- [EAM GmbH](https://eam-gmbh.com/) ([bytejail](https://bytejail.com/))
- [Informatica](https://www.informatica.com/)
- [Keybase](https://keybase.io/)
- [OVH](https://www.ovh.com)
- [Paragon Initiative Enterprises](https://paragonie.com)
- [Pi-lar](http://www.pi-lar.net)
- [Riseup](https://riseup.net)
- [Supercell](http://supercell.com)
- [Wire](https://wire.com)
- [Yandex](https://www.yandex.com)

Commit message:

Track 4 files into repository.
- modified bindings_for_other_languages/README.md
- modified installation/README.md
- modified internals/README.md
- modified libsodium_users/README.md

Auto commit by GitBook Editor

libsodium_users/README.md, after:

# Applications using libsodium
Some applications using Libsodium. Send a [pull request](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-doc/blob/master/libsodium_users/README.md) to add yours to that list.

- [CRUD Messenger](https://github.com/zyisrad/crudMessenger): A libsodium-php and MongoDB based single server messaging platform.
- [CurveLock](https://github.com/adamcaudill/CurveLock): Message encryption for Windows.
- [Cyph](https://cyph.im/): End-to-end encrypted, authenticated, and ephemeral chat with voice + video + file transfers.
- [Discord](https://discordapp.com): All-in-one voice and text chat for gamers that’s free, secure, and works on both your desktop and phone.
- [Evernym Plenum](http://evernym.com/): A byzantine fault tolerant protocol.
- [Fastd](http://fastd.readthedocs.org): A fast and secure tunnelling daemon.
- [FeCl](https://github.com/jhwgh1968/FeCl): A secure message-passing server based on libsodium.
- [Flocksy](https://github.com/alex-dot/syncbox): An anonymous file synchronisation tool.
- [Glorytun](https://github.com/angt/glorytun): A small, simple and very fast VPN.
- [Habitat](https://www.habitat.sh/): Habitat, by Chef, is automation that travels with the app.
- [Hat-Backup](https://github.com/google/hat-backup): A backend-agnostic snapshotting backup system.
- [KadNode](https://github.com/mwarning/KadNode): A small P2P DNS resolution daemon based on a Distributed Hash Table.
- [Kickpass](https://github.com/paulfariello/kickpass): A stupid simple password manager.
- [Lawncipher](https://github.com/LockateMe/Lawncipher): An embedded, encrypted, multi-purpose document store.
- [Lageant](https://github.com/bitbeans/lageant): Libsodium Authentication Agent.
- [Libsodium password hashing schemes for Dovecot](https://github.com/LuckyFellow/dovecot-libsodium-plugin): Dovecot plugin to support Scrypt and Argon2 for password hashing.
- [Libsodium for Universal Windows Platform](https://github.com/charlesportwoodii/libsodium-uwp): a C++ Windows Runtime Component for UWP applications.
- [Lumimaja](https://github.com/Safari77/lumimaja): PasswordSafe with Argon2 KDF, data encrypted with ChaCha20Poly1305, and Yubikey support.
- [Magic Wormhole](https://github.com/warner/magic-wormhole): Get things from one computer to another, safely.
- [MaidSafe](http://maidsafe.net/): A new Secure way to access a world of existing apps where the security of your data is put above all else.
- [Minisign](https://jedisct1.github.io/minisign/): A dead simple tool to sign files and verify signatures.
- [MLVPN](http://zehome.github.io/MLVPN/): A multi-link VPN (ADSL/SDSL/xDSL/Network aggregator)
- [Molch](https://github.com/FSMaxB/molch): An implementation of the Axolotl ratchet.
- [NanoChat](https://github.com/hamidreza-s/NanoChat): A P2P, E2E encrypted and discoverable chat application on top of nanomsg library.
- [Netcode.io](http://netcode.io): A simple protocol for creating secure client/server connections over UDP, designed for games like agar.io that shunt players from a main website or web backend to a number of dedicated server instances, with each dedicated server having some maximum number of players.
- [NTPsec](https://github.com/ntpsec/ntpsec): A security-hardened implementation of Network Time Protocol Version 4.
- [Open Reputation](https://openreputation.net/): An open source decentralized platform that maps identity and reputation onto the Internet-of-things.
- [OpenBazaar](https://www.openbazaar.org/): A free market for all. No fees, no restrictions.
- [PAVE](https://pave.software/): The Password Manager. Easy password sharing for teams. No cloud.
- [PCP](https://github.com/TLINDEN/pcp): Pretty Curved Privacy (pcp1) is a commandline utility which can be used to encrypt files.
- [Pbox](https://github.com/zyisrad/pbox): A CLI password manager.
- [Petmail](https://github.com/warner/petmail): A secure communication and file-sharing system.
- [PipeSocks](https://github.com/pipesocks/pipesocks): A pipe-like SOCKS5 tunnel system.
- [PowerDNS](https://www.powerdns.com/): PowerDNS has been designed to serve both the needs of small installations by being easy to setup, as well as for serving very large query volumes on large numbers of domains. Additionally, PowerDNS offers very high domain resolution performance.
- [QtCrypt](https://github.com/trashctor/QtCrypt): Lightweight, portable application that encrypts files and directories using a symmetric-key algorithm.
- [Reop](http://www.tedunangst.com/flak/post/reop): Reasonable expectation of privacy.
- [Rubinius](http://rubinius.com/): Rubinius is a platform for building programming language technology.
- [SODA](https://github.com/vong-xiv/SODA): The SODA project aims to investigate the relationship between server components and server performance.
- [SaltStack](http://saltstack.com/): SaltStack software orchestrates the build and ongoing management of any modern infrastructure. 
- [Sandstorm](https://sandstorm.io/): An open source operating system for personal and private clouds.
- [ShadowSocks](https://shadowsocks.org/en/index.html): A secure socks5 proxy, designed to protect your Internet traffic.
- [Simple DnsCrypt](https://github.com/bitbeans/SimpleDnsCrypt): A simple management tool for dnscrypt-proxy.
- [Splonebox](https://splone.com/splonebox/): An open source network assessment tool with focus on modularity.
- [Stellar](https://www.stellar.org/): An open platform for building financial products that connect people everywhere.
- [Tbak](https://github.com/tux3/tbak): Encrypted, compressed, distributed backups.
- [Telehash](http://telehash.org/): An embeddable private network stack for mobile, web, and devices.
- [Tinfoil Chat NaCl](https://github.com/maqp/tfc-nacl): TFC-NaCl is a high assurance encryption plugin for the Pidgin IM client.
- [Tox](https://tox.chat/): A new kind of instant messenging.
- [TREES](https://0xacab.org/riseuplabs/trees): A Dovecot email storage encryption plugin.
- [Ultrapowa Clash Server](http://ultrapowa.com/ucs/): UCS is a server emulator for the famous game Clash of Clans
- [VOLTTRON](http://gridoptics.pnnl.gov/VOLTTRON/): VOLTTRON is an innovative distributed control and sensing software platform. Its source code has been released, making it possible for researchers and others to use this tool to build applications for more efficiently managing energy use among appliances and devices, including heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, lighting, electric vehicles and others.
- [VPNCloud](https://github.com/dswd/vpncloud.rs): A Peer-to-Peer VPN.
- [Wire](https://wire.com/): Modern, private communications. Crystal clear voice, video and group chats. No advertising. Your data, always encrypted.
- [Zcash](https://z.cash/): Zcash is a decentralized and open source cryptocurrency that aims to set a new standard for privacy through the use of groundbreaking cryptography.

# Libraries using libsodium
Some libraries and frameworks using Libsodium. Send a [pull request](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-doc/blob/master/libsodium_users/README.md) to add yours to that list.

- [Asio Sodium Socket](https://github.com/mikezackles/asio_sodium_socket): A header-only C++14 library implementing custom transport encryption using libsodium and Asio's stackless coroutines.
- [Blobcrypt](https://github.com/jedisct1/blobcrypt): Authenticated encryption for streams and arbitrary large files.
- [Cordova Minisodium](https://npmdaily.com/pkg/cordova-plugin-minisodium): A minimal sodium plugin for Cordova - for iOS and Android.
- [EdCert](https://docs.rs/edcert/): A Rust crate to sign and verify content using Ed25519.
- [Halite](https://github.com/paragonie/halite): High-level cryptography interface for PHP.
- [libsaxolotl](https://github.com/stef/libsaxolotl): An Axolotol implementation in C using libsodium.
- [neuropil](https://www.neuropil.org/): An IoT secure messaging library with end-to-end encryption written in C and using libsodium
- [Libsodium-Laravel](https://github.com/scrothers/libsodium-laravel): Laravel integration.
- [Libsodium-UE4](https://github.com/maxenko/libsodium-ue4): An easy to use cryptography plugin for Unreal Engine 4 based on libsodium.
- [LibSQRL](https://sqrlid.com/libsqrl/): SQRL authentication library.
- [libyojimbo](https://github.com/networkprotocol/libyojimbo): A library for creating secure client/server network protocols over UDP.
- [MEGA SDK](https://github.com/meganz/sdk): SDK by mega.nz, a secure cloud storage provider that protects your data, thanks to end-to-end encryption.
- [Macaroons](https://github.com/rescrv/libmacaroons): Macaroons are flexible authorization credentials that support decentralized delegation, attenuation, and verification.
- [MatrixSSL](http://www.matrixssl.org/): Lightweight embedded SSL/TLS implementation that can use libsodium as a crypto provider.
- [minisign-net](https://github.com/bitbeans/minisign-net): .NET library to handle and create minisign signatures.
- [NaclKeys](https://github.com/bitbeans/NaclKeys): Library to generate libsodium-net compatible KeyPair`s.
- [OAuthSDK](https://github.com/ramki1979/OAuthSDK): OAuth 1 and OAuth 2 framework in Swift for iOS.
- [Posh-Sodium](https://github.com/jamessantiago/PoSH-Sodium): A powershell module.
- [Pull-box-stream](https://github.com/dominictarr/pull-box-stream): One way streaming encryption for Javascript.
- [Smart Encryption](https://github.com/adamcaudill/SmartEncryption): Secure by default encryption for .NET
- [Stream Cryptor](https://github.com/bitbeans/StreamCryptor): Stream encryption & decryption with libsodium and protobuf for .NET
- [The Update Framework](https://github.com/theupdateframework/tuf): A plug-and-play library for securing a software updater.
- [ZeroMQ](http://zeromq.org/): Connect your code in any language, on any platform.

# Companies using libsodium
Some companies using Libsodium, possibly in non-opensource products. Send a [pull request](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium-doc/blob/master/libsodium_users/README.md) to add yours to that list.

- [Bearch Inc.](http://www.getbearch.com/)
- [Digital Ocean](https://www.digitalocean.com/)
- [EAM GmbH](https://eam-gmbh.com/) ([bytejail](https://bytejail.com/))
- [Informatica](https://www.informatica.com/)
- [Keybase](https://keybase.io/)
- [OVH](https://www.ovh.com)
- [Paragon Initiative Enterprises](https://paragonie.com)
- [Pi-lar](http://www.pi-lar.net)
- [Riseup](https://riseup.net)
- [Supercell](http://supercell.com)
- [Wire](https://wire.com)
- [Yandex](https://www.yandex.com)
